[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: The point Lipman made in that chapter was that all of us have a picture of the world in our heads
[Amit Varma]: and that picture can never correspond to the actual world exactly or even to other such pictures inside other people's heads
[Amit Varma]: because the world is too complicated.
[Amit Varma]: We are a storytelling species and all of us build or subscribe to simple narratives that help make sense of a complex world.
[Amit Varma]: This is the necessary mechanism and there's nothing wrong in this.
[Amit Varma]: However, in modern times when our means of getting news and knowledge are widely dispersed
[Amit Varma]: and the political discourse is so polarized, it means that these narratives diverge furiously
[Amit Varma]: more than it used to in the past when the media was monolithic and there was some sort of broad consensus on the truth.
[Amit Varma]: And once we build a narrative in our heads about the world, we only accept news and information that conforms to this narrative.
[Amit Varma]: There is too much cognitive dissonance otherwise, too much hard work for us to do to keep modifying that picture in our heads.
[Amit Varma]: At some level, this explains the attractiveness of fake news.
[Amit Varma]: Anything that reinforces our worldview is legit, everything else is fake.
[Amit Varma]: You might think that this is fine, let people believe what they believe, but fake news has real consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Rumors can kill people, decide elections, tear communities apart and spread cancer in our society
[Amit Varma]: and it has never been as much of a threat as it is today, enabled and turbocharged by technology.
[Amit Varma]: Something must be done.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest on the show today is someone I've admired for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: Pratik Sinha runs Alt News, an organization that has made it a mission to bust fake news from all sides of the political spectrum.
[Amit Varma]: It's been fascinating for me to watch from a distance how Alt News has evolved as a resistance movement against falsehood.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm very pleased to have finally gotten Pratik to agree to come on my show.
[Amit Varma]: But before I cut to my conversation with him, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages like Hindi and Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: An unlimited monthly subscription costs only Rs. 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I want to recommend today is Enlightenment Now by Steven Pinker.
[Amit Varma]: Steven Pinker was a guest on an episode of The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You can check that out in the archives page.
[Amit Varma]: And the book that we spoke about is this very one, Enlightenment Now, now on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30-day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Pratik, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Pratik, tell me a little bit about yourself. Where were you born? Where did you grow up? What's your background like?
[Guest]: I was born in Ahmedabad. I did my schooling in Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: Did my engineering from Bangalore. That was 1999 to 2003.
[Guest]: After that, I worked in Bangalore for three years.
[Guest]: I worked only for startups through my career as a software engineer.
[Guest]: In 2006, I went to the U.S. sometime in mid-2006, I think 2007.
[Guest]: And then till 2010, I was in the U.S.
[Guest]: Then 2010, I moved to Vietnam. And then 2010 to 2013, I was in Vietnam.
[Guest]: And then 2013 is when I came back to Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: And that is essentially where some of the political journey started.
[Guest]: My politicization started, not the political journey.
[Amit Varma]: But in a sense, you know, because of by virtue of the family that you're born in
[Amit Varma]: that your parents stayed, and I want to discuss that with you as well.
[Amit Varma]: You were politically aware from a long while before that, right?
[Guest]: Definitely. The political awareness was right since I was a child, you know,
[Guest]: I was forced to watch the same news on multiple channels again and again.
[Guest]: You know, because, you know, that is the time when cable TV came in, multiple channels came in.
[Guest]: They're always watching news, you know, there was no soap operas there.
[Guest]: And all the discussion on dinner table was always about politics.
[Guest]: So, yes, I was very much politically aware, connected.
[Guest]: But it's just that, you know, when you're away, then you look at things from a distance,
[Guest]: you're not actively involved. But once I came back to Ahmedabad in 2013,
[Guest]: and that is the time we started a website called Truth of Gujarat.
[Guest]: And it was also a time when my father got cancer.
[Guest]: So he was homebound, and both my parents were homebound.
[Guest]: My mom had also retired by that point of time.
[Guest]: And the three of us spent a lot of time together in those nine months till my father passed away.
[Guest]: And that is when I sort of got a lot of dump of knowledge,
[Guest]: because we were all together, you know, sitting in a room, nothing to do.
[Guest]: So we did a lot of talking.
[Guest]: And which is why I often say that, yes, I was politically aware,
[Guest]: but the real politicization started during that period where Truth of Gujarat started.
[Guest]: And when, you know, there was a lot of knowledge transfer from my parents to me.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about your dad, because he's obviously someone who's been a very big influence on you
[Amit Varma]: and a remarkable activist in his own time, for those who know about that period.
[Guest]: Tell us a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So my father was a physicist.
[Guest]: He did his PhD from an institute called Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: Before that, he's in IIT Kanpur, Passau.
[Guest]: And he got into union activities.
[Guest]: There was a class for an employee who was kicked, and he went up to the director to complain about it.
[Guest]: And that started a movement which started formation.
[Guest]: I think Physical PRL was the first organization which got a union,
[Guest]: a scientific institute which got a union in the 70s.
[Guest]: And then he was a postdoc at that point of time.
[Guest]: He was terminated, fought the case, lost the case.
[Guest]: And then eventually he did his LLB in late 80s, became a lawyer.
[Guest]: A lot of activities at that point of time was concentrated on unions, various industrial unions,
[Guest]: unions like Atira, NID, IIM, etc.
[Guest]: Eventually they got into civil rights movements such as housing, education, environment.
[Guest]: And then when 2002 happened, that is when the organization saw that
[Guest]: the people were split along vertical lines, along communal lines,
[Guest]: which is when Jan Sanghash Manch, which is the primary civil liberties organization,
[Guest]: they decided to take part in Nanavati Commission.
[Guest]: Then the spate of fake encounters started in Gujarat,
[Guest]: and many victims approached Jan Sanghash Manch.
[Guest]: So we did multiple cases from Saurabh Uddin to Ishwar Jahan to Sadiq Jamal to Tulsi Prajapati.
[Guest]: So my father's journey has essentially been from a union activist to a civil rights activist
[Guest]: to a lawyer who's fighting the cause of, you know, design communal polarization
[Guest]: that was sort of going on in the society.
[Amit Varma]: And in those days, like for part of that time, of course, you were a software engineer,
[Amit Varma]: you were away, you went to the US, you went to Vietnam,
[Amit Varma]: but was there a sense of worry for you that this is dangerous work that my parents are involved in?
[Amit Varma]: Or, I mean, obviously you were supportive, but were you also worried at the same time that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why do they have to take such risks? And did it strike you as a kid that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your father is involved in all these causes?
[Amit Varma]: And at one hand, it's obviously romantic that someone is fighting for the downtrodden,
[Amit Varma]: but on the other hand, did you ever feel that, you know, had he stuck to his physics
[Amit Varma]: or had he stuck to a regular career line, it could have made a material difference to your lives?
[Guest]: No, that thought never occurred.
[Guest]: There have been times when sort of, you know, papers have been slipped under, you know,
[Guest]: left at my house with death threats, et cetera, for my father.
[Guest]: But somehow it never crossed our mind.
[Guest]: I think in all these things, the support system matters a lot.
[Guest]: Even now, for example, I have, you know, got a phone call with a death threat,
[Guest]: like, you know, stop writing or we'll shoot you.
[Guest]: This happened sometime in 2017.
[Guest]: But, you know, we often look at people as individuals who are doing something,
[Guest]: but it's usually the support system around that that matters.
[Guest]: In case of my father, it was my mom who sort of stood like a rock.
[Guest]: And she was an activist.
[Guest]: Her work is not as much recognized because she was a government employee
[Guest]: and, you know, she did not come out and open.
[Guest]: But even now, for example, there was a legal notice from a news channel,
[Guest]: I wouldn't like the name, when we did a story about them.
[Guest]: And it was my mother who said that, you know, we are not taking down the story, come what may.
[Guest]: So it is always about support.
[Guest]: Whenever you're doing any such work, it is the people around you,
[Guest]: the support system that matters the most.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about 2013, because you point out about how, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you had those nine months with your parents and you were sitting and talking a lot.
[Amit Varma]: You described it as a dump of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And that must have been very important for you,
[Amit Varma]: because I suppose both of them are sort of giving you all of their insights
[Amit Varma]: and learnings through the years.
[Amit Varma]: What were they like?
[Amit Varma]: And how did that change the way you looked at India and politics and what was happening?
[Guest]: So during that period, see, it was not like we were sitting and they were talking.
[Guest]: That is, the knowledge transfer happened through a project called Truth of Gujarat.
[Guest]: So on July 2nd, 2013, the Ishwar Jahan Charsheed came out.
[Guest]: And this was the Charsheed which spoke about Kali Daadi and Safed Daadi
[Guest]: giving a go-ahead for the Ishwar Jahan encounter.
[Guest]: According to Gujarat police's statement given to CBI,
[Guest]: it was claimed that Kali Daadi was a moniker used for Mr. Amit Shah
[Guest]: and Safed Daadi was a moniker used for Mr. Modi.
[Guest]: And what happened thereafter was that even though there was such a huge revelation,
[Guest]: the media organizations did not really pick it up.
[Guest]: You know, it was a huge revelation.
[Guest]: So I suggested to my parents that let's put all the information online.
[Guest]: We have a lot of information.
[Guest]: Let's put it online and that is how Truth of Gujarat came about.
[Guest]: And because I understood a bit of social media, I understood the youth a little.
[Guest]: So I said, every article has to be limited to four or five paragraphs
[Guest]: because people don't have the attention span per se.
[Guest]: And that is how we started and it became extremely popular.
[Guest]: Because again, even in 2013, that was the only sort of voice of opposition, so to say, in Gujarat.
[Guest]: So during that process, you know, while writing articles,
[Guest]: while discussing articles with my father and with my mother,
[Guest]: that is the time, you know, the conversations happened around these articles.
[Guest]: And it sort of gave me a lot of insight into their work, you know,
[Guest]: because they have worked across different issues from working with labor rights.
[Guest]: So, for example, something as simple as, if you observe, you know,
[Guest]: if there's a farmer's movement, the labor do not join.
[Guest]: If there's a labor movement, the farmers do not join.
[Guest]: You might think outside that there are multiple common causes, but it does not happen.
[Guest]: People fight for their own causes.
[Guest]: And you cannot ever say that, why are you not fighting for somebody else's causes?
[Guest]: So things like that, you know, which otherwise it's difficult to understand and know
[Guest]: that why there are so many different sections in the society,
[Guest]: which are fighting for their own causes.
[Guest]: But we keep talking about unity, but that does not happen.
[Guest]: There's a reason for it. They have seen this in their...
[Guest]: And again, things like, you know, that if you're in a union,
[Guest]: you don't talk about who you're voting for, whether you're voting for Congress or BJP.
[Guest]: They're fighting for a cause.
[Guest]: They are not there to sort of... They are not political workers.
[Guest]: They are fighting as laborers.
[Guest]: So you have to recognize, you know, in what capacity is a certain individual
[Guest]: acting at any point in time to understand the outcomes of a movement, etc.
[Guest]: So those are the things.
[Guest]: Of course, there's so many things and it's been four or five years.
[Guest]: My father passed away in 2014.
[Guest]: But a lot of these small, small things, which I understood in conversations with them.
[Amit Varma]: Was it during this time or was it earlier?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it something that was building up over time that you made the decision that
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to be a software engineer anymore.
[Amit Varma]: I want to do this. This is more important.
[Amit Varma]: What was that process like?
[Guest]: So the decision was not to be a software engineer.
[Guest]: The decision... So I was working on various technologies
[Guest]: and these were cutting edge technologies.
[Guest]: But what I realized over time is that none of that is going to reach the common man
[Guest]: for a very long time, the sort of stuff that I was working on.
[Guest]: And this decision actually came around 2016.
[Guest]: My mother and I, we walked 10 days from Ahmedabad to Una.
[Guest]: There were four Dalit boys who were flogged in Una.
[Guest]: The rally was taken out from Ahmedabad to Una.
[Guest]: This is the rally in which Jignesh Mevani sort of came out as a leader.
[Guest]: And during this rally, I documented the entire thing through Truth of Gujarat
[Guest]: in terms of videos and images.
[Guest]: The thing was, there was only one person from national media,
[Guest]: one person from Hindustan Times.
[Guest]: But otherwise people for the first five, six days had almost entirely ignored this rally.
[Guest]: And, you know, when I started putting the videos and images
[Guest]: and they started getting retweeted and shared massively.
[Guest]: And then eventually the media came in and it became a big thing.
[Guest]: So that is the time I realized that what is the power of alternative media?
[Guest]: And I thought that I had certain skills to put some of my work in alternative media.
[Guest]: At the same point in time, I was also working on misinformation right since 2013
[Guest]: because there was misinformation even in the 2014 elections,
[Guest]: but at a much, much smaller scale.
[Guest]: But I was working on that and I could see an increasing trend
[Guest]: and especially starting end of 2015, 2016 when Jio came.
[Guest]: So I could see a trend.
[Guest]: And I also realized that traditional journalists do not have the skills to deal with this.
[Guest]: Even though the skills required are, it is not very difficult.
[Guest]: Even with a five-day training, a lot of traditional journalists will be able to bust
[Guest]: at least 70-80% of the things that go out on social media.
[Guest]: But it is just that they are not trained for it.
[Guest]: And media organizations, for media organizations, this was not a priority.
[Guest]: So at that point of time, I thought that, you know, why not use some of my skills
[Guest]: and some of the experience that I gained while running Truth of Gujarat and start a portal.
[Guest]: So the first document that we came up with was in September 2016.
[Guest]: This was right after Una Rally.
[Guest]: The first two points in the document as to what, there were multiple points that we had written,
[Guest]: but the first two points were, number one, debunk misinformation on social media.
[Guest]: Number two, document people's struggles.
[Guest]: And we never ended up doing number two because number two needs finances where,
[Guest]: so you have to go to a state, you have to know the local language,
[Guest]: you have to stay, you have to pay for your own lodging, food, etc.
[Guest]: And we did not have the resources to do that.
[Guest]: So that is how we started with debunking misinformation.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to take a brief digression here, a couple of digressions.
[Amit Varma]: I'll come back to this.
[Amit Varma]: But you've said a few things while you were talking about this,
[Amit Varma]: which have raised sort of lateral questions in me.
[Amit Varma]: So just indulge me while we talk about them.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things is that when you were talking about 2002 and what happened in Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: and you used a phrase that there were vertical lines drawn between people.
[Amit Varma]: And I just want to explore that a bit by which,
[Amit Varma]: I'm presuming you don't mean horizontal lines,
[Amit Varma]: which would be differentiating classes or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but vertical lines between Hindu and Muslim?
[Guest]: Not between Hindu and Muslims, between Hindu and Muslims and between Hindus and Hindus.
[Guest]: So, for example, again, I was not in India at this point of time.
[Guest]: So all of this is what I've heard from my parents.
[Guest]: So we had a union and various organizations.
[Guest]: The city was burning.
[Guest]: And one of the organizations was close to my house.
[Guest]: So my parents walked to that place.
[Guest]: They were having a small meeting.
[Guest]: And somebody who was actually used to teach me drawing when I was a kid,
[Guest]: never successfully could do so.
[Guest]: But that person, while talking about the riots,
[Guest]: he stood up and said,
[Guest]: that these people should be killed.
[Guest]: So that is what shocked many people in the organization,
[Guest]: especially my parents, senior people of the organization,
[Guest]: that we've been running this organization for such a long time,
[Guest]: but we did not know that this communal hatred was so deep rooted.
[Guest]: So vertical, yes.
[Guest]: If you remember 2002 riots,
[Guest]: if you think of the accused,
[Guest]: a lot of accused in urban areas were from Dalit communities.
[Guest]: A lot of accused in the rural areas were from Adivasi communities.
[Guest]: So essentially it was a project to bring all castes together.
[Guest]: And it was an unnatural project in the sense that
[Guest]: the upper caste and lower caste are supposed to be ideologically opposed.
[Guest]: You know, one is the, there is, you know,
[Guest]: Brahmins and Dalits are supposed to be opposed in different ways.
[Guest]: But this is a project which united everybody.
[Guest]: Which is why I say that, you know,
[Guest]: there was a vertical division essentially between Muslims and Hindus,
[Guest]: but a certain section of Hindus who still believed in certain secular values
[Guest]: and even between that.
[Guest]: And we continue to see that today, this vertical polarization,
[Guest]: whether it is in our friends, family, et cetera,
[Amit Varma]: we just completely vertically divided.
[Amit Varma]: And when you sort of look at, I mean, of course,
[Amit Varma]: that a whole project of superimposing a broader Hindutva identity
[Amit Varma]: across castes and all that is something that continues to this day
[Amit Varma]: and might even have been fairly successful so far.
[Amit Varma]: But when you sort of look at what society in Gujarat was,
[Amit Varma]: say in 2013, when you came back,
[Amit Varma]: and what it was earlier when you were still studying
[Amit Varma]: and when you were still sort of just living there,
[Amit Varma]: do you think there were fundamental changes within society itself?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you think that those divisions, fault lines were always there,
[Amit Varma]: but had now been amplified and given expression?
[Guest]: So again, my understanding of this, as I said,
[Guest]: became better only after 2013.
[Guest]: But even when I was in school, there were riots.
[Guest]: So Gujarat has often very, has been a tinderbox, you know,
[Guest]: even after Babri Masjid demolition,
[Guest]: there were riots in Ahmedabad and things like that.
[Guest]: In 1969, there were riots, which are much bigger than 2002.
[Guest]: And that time there was a Congress government.
[Guest]: It was not a BJP government.
[Guest]: And there were many Muslims who were killed.
[Guest]: So Gujarat has had a history,
[Guest]: but the polarization has definitely increased over time.
[Guest]: And this is, for example, if you talk to people the age my mother,
[Guest]: so my mother often tells me this tale,
[Guest]: that she's from a Jain family.
[Guest]: But her father built a house for a friend of theirs,
[Guest]: a Muslim couple at that age,
[Guest]: because the family was not accepting.
[Guest]: So he built, sort of carved out a small portion in their house
[Guest]: where that Muslim couple could stay.
[Guest]: So still that used to happen.
[Guest]: Now, those kinds of stories are very, very,
[Guest]: you don't hear those kinds of stories in Gujarat.
[Guest]: You know, you have Juhapura where all the Muslims stay.
[Guest]: You know, basically they're ghettos.
[Guest]: You know, there's so much polarization
[Guest]: that there's very little intermingling between different communities,
[Guest]: except for maybe, you know, at workplaces.
[Amit Varma]: But cultural intermingling is very, very minimal.
[Amit Varma]: My next digression is both about politics and strategy
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you mentioned that
[Amit Varma]: when your father would work with unions and so on,
[Amit Varma]: that one of the characteristics of unions
[Amit Varma]: was that all of these people would come together for a specific cause,
[Amit Varma]: but they wouldn't necessarily be united otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I suppose in one way, this can be a bug
[Amit Varma]: and you can say that this unity and this organization is wasted
[Amit Varma]: because it's only for this cause.
[Amit Varma]: In another way, it could be a feature because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise it would be impossible for them to unite for a cause
[Amit Varma]: if you allowed other issues to sort of divide them.
[Amit Varma]: But quite separate from the matter of how it plays out in terms of unions,
[Amit Varma]: how does it play out broadly in the political space
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that I would imagine that
[Amit Varma]: a coalition of people who are, say, against fake news
[Amit Varma]: would be a broader coalition, would have disagreements on many things,
[Amit Varma]: should be what Congress or ARP or whoever, not vote at all,
[Amit Varma]: but would have disagreements on many other things,
[Amit Varma]: but could be united against falsehood.
[Amit Varma]: So is this sort of a consideration that plays out?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what do you think about this?
[Guest]: No, two are different things.
[Guest]: Fighting for labor rights, etc. is a different matter altogether.
[Guest]: There you're talking about people, you know, if there's a strike,
[Guest]: let's say there was a 27-day Saif-e-Kamdaa strike in August 2016,
[Guest]: right after UNA rally, and which means 27 days of no pay for workers.
[Guest]: You know, here you're talking about people who are living on a day-to-day basis
[Guest]: if 27 days of no pay means disastrous for them, right?
[Guest]: So for them to now come and join another strike of another organization,
[Guest]: give up their day pay, is a different matter
[Guest]: as opposed to people sitting on social media and extending support.
[Guest]: So these two cannot be compared.
[Guest]: You can compare people on social media extending support for,
[Guest]: let's say, farmer's rights, you know.
[Guest]: So there'll be urban sections of the population who would extend support
[Guest]: for the struggle of farmers, etc.
[Guest]: That could be a comparison.
[Guest]: So yes, people do unite on a common cause,
[Guest]: but people fighting for different issues at the ground level
[Guest]: rarely ever unite.
[Guest]: And you can see that in politics also.
[Guest]: For example, and this I have again figured out by talking to people.
[Guest]: So for example, in Karnataka, Congress and JDS have always been
[Guest]: opposed to each other, right?
[Guest]: And now one day you ask them to come together and form a successful coalition.
[Guest]: The people on the top may start sort of joining hands,
[Guest]: but the people who are on the ground who are all...
[Guest]: No, this is a different kind of thing.
[Guest]: Here it is not that the laborers and farmers are against each other,
[Guest]: but I'm talking about a different kind of phenomenon.
[Guest]: To think that the Congress and JDS workers will suddenly be happy
[Guest]: and working with each other.
[Guest]: Same with SPBSP in Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: We have seen all these coalitions, these dream coalitions,
[Guest]: the way media projects it,
[Guest]: but we have seen this failing again and again and again.
[Guest]: So there are people who are sort of concentrated on one area,
[Guest]: and it's very rarely that you see sort of a wide unity of masses.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a, you know, moving on to a related issue,
[Amit Varma]: there's a term in public choice theory called the free rider effect,
[Amit Varma]: where what happens is that there might be many people who care about
[Amit Varma]: a particular cause that are affected by it,
[Amit Varma]: but most of them won't actually do anything concrete to take action
[Amit Varma]: or protest it, rather free ride.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a lot of people who may be against fake news,
[Amit Varma]: may be bothered by it,
[Amit Varma]: and maybe they have the capacity to do some of the work themselves.
[Amit Varma]: They can do the reverse Google searches and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: they can do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But they instead kind of choose to free ride on say an alt news,
[Amit Varma]: which is sort of doing all this.
[Amit Varma]: So does it sometimes frustrate you that, look,
[Amit Varma]: I am embarked on this journey, which is so difficult,
[Amit Varma]: and there is a struggle and all these people express support,
[Amit Varma]: but in concrete terms,
[Amit Varma]: it's almost like there are a few people walking alone.
[Guest]: It does not frustrate me.
[Guest]: See, everybody has chosen different aims and ambitions in life.
[Guest]: For me, alt news is presently a very, very important project.
[Guest]: You're doing podcasting.
[Guest]: This is what you are doing.
[Guest]: Before you're doing a podcast, you're researching several hours.
[Guest]: Now, in between that, you get some misinformation.
[Guest]: I can't expect you to go up and split a video into frames,
[Guest]: go and look up, oh, this is the video.
[Guest]: I don't think that is the right expectation.
[Guest]: So here we have to identify what is the problem.
[Guest]: The problem is that there are so many means of getting information,
[Guest]: but there's an easy means of getting information,
[Guest]: but there's no easy means of figuring out
[Guest]: what is the truth behind information.
[Guest]: If you had something where, you know, you get something,
[Guest]: you get a video or an image on WhatsApp,
[Guest]: and if you could upload it to an app and the app would tell you
[Guest]: that this is, you know, in one tab, the app gives you an answer
[Guest]: that this is probably the fact check
[Guest]: or the real story behind this image and video,
[Guest]: then you're more likely to do it.
[Guest]: So it is the fact that people are not doing it is a problem
[Guest]: that needs to be solved.
[Guest]: It is not a matter of frustration.
[Guest]: One has to understand why are people not doing it
[Guest]: and what will make people do so.
[Guest]: You know, what are the tools?
[Guest]: You know, what does it need for people to go from not doing it
[Guest]: to starting to do it?
[Guest]: So, yeah, it does not frustrate me really.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of go back to your journey with Truth of Gujarat
[Amit Varma]: and then later Alt News.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned that there was some fake news already in 2014
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, but it's only in 2016
[Amit Varma]: that sort of there was an inflection point.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: What happened in 2016?
[Amit Varma]: What confluence of events came together
[Amit Varma]: to make fake news a real threat?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So what happened in 2016 was that in November 2016,
[Guest]: Jio was launched.
[Guest]: And in anticipation of Jio being launched,
[Guest]: multiple telecom couriers were already dropping their rates.
[Guest]: So the pattern that we saw was that end of 2015
[Guest]: and beginning of 2016, these websites which came up
[Guest]: and which had a lot of content,
[Guest]: a lot of misinformation and ads.
[Guest]: So people realized that there was a way to monetize this.
[Guest]: There's a way that now Internet is reaching
[Guest]: farther and farther corners of this country.
[Guest]: And by writing sensational stuff
[Guest]: and getting people to click on ads,
[Guest]: and a lot of these were semi-porn ads, you know.
[Guest]: So Tabola kind of ad format,
[Guest]: you have six to nine boxes at the bottom of the article,
[Guest]: but a lot of that was essentially nude imagery
[Guest]: or semi-nude imagery.
[Guest]: So that is the pattern that we started seeing.
[Guest]: And along with that, these increasing forwards, et cetera,
[Guest]: multiple Facebook pages came up,
[Guest]: which started putting whatever was on WhatsApp
[Guest]: on their Facebook pages.
[Guest]: So essentially there were more and more people
[Guest]: who could be reached on social media,
[Guest]: and there were certain sections on the society
[Guest]: who realized that this is a good way to monetize this.
[Guest]: That is how it started, according to me.
[Guest]: And then there were others who saw these people,
[Guest]: seeing that how easily people were consuming misinformation
[Guest]: and saw that there is a political end to this,
[Guest]: that this can be used actually for a political purpose.
[Guest]: And that is what started.
[Guest]: If you remember in November 2016 when demonetization happened,
[Guest]: this is a different kind of rumor, but just the impact of it.
[Guest]: A rumor went about that shops are running out of sugar.
[Guest]: And there were shops which were attacked by civilians
[Guest]: just because of the fear that they are running out of sugar.
[Guest]: Now, somebody might think, you know, running out of sugar,
[Guest]: why would you attack a shop?
[Guest]: But what we did not realize was that the society
[Guest]: was in a stressed state because of demonetization.
[Guest]: And, you know, it was a sort of a sudden decision
[Guest]: which people did not anticipate.
[Guest]: So then at that point of time,
[Guest]: they were ready to believe anything that is put out.
[Guest]: So there were so many rumors about demonetization,
[Guest]: for example, that GPS chip, right?
[Guest]: And people took in these rumors.
[Guest]: Everybody took in these rumors.
[Guest]: Some of the rumors even I might have believed,
[Guest]: you know, because we were in such a state.
[Guest]: So it's very important to understand
[Guest]: that the more stress the society gets,
[Guest]: you know, the more the rumors,
[Guest]: the more will people intake these kinds of rumors.
[Guest]: So those are the observations that we had
[Guest]: and which is why we created that document in September 2016,
[Guest]: saying that, you know, we really need to sort of start
[Guest]: debunking misinformation, create a portal for it.
[Guest]: And me and Zubair, Mohammed Zubair,
[Guest]: both of us co-founded Alt News.
[Guest]: Zubair used to run a Facebook page,
[Guest]: a parody Facebook page called Unofficial Subramaniam Swamy.
[Guest]: I used to run Truth of Gujarat.
[Guest]: And we already had a collective following about 800,000,
[Guest]: between 800,000 and a million,
[Guest]: including Twitter and Facebook.
[Guest]: So we were in a unique position that we already have an audience
[Guest]: as opposed to many organizations who start without an audience.
[Guest]: And we're like, let's start putting things on a portal
[Guest]: and let's see what happens.
[Guest]: You know, one year hence, we'll see whether it works out or not.
[Guest]: Zubair continued to work,
[Guest]: but I stopped freelancing at that point in time.
[Guest]: And let's do this for one year,
[Guest]: we'll figure out whether this works or not.
[Guest]: But within three months, Alt News took off quite well.
[Amit Varma]: And you said that, you know, you told me earlier
[Amit Varma]: that the impetus behind Alt News was really fear.
[Amit Varma]: Just elaborate on that a bit.
[Guest]: Yeah, so a lot of these videos,
[Guest]: some of the first few articles that we've written on Alt News
[Guest]: are videos from Mexico, Brazil, et cetera,
[Guest]: being passed around claiming that these are Muslims killing Hindus.
[Guest]: And every time at that point of time,
[Guest]: when we used to see these videos,
[Guest]: there used to be a fear that, you know,
[Guest]: this is going to lead to the next riot.
[Guest]: If you remember Muzaffarnagar riots, that is what happened, right?
[Guest]: There was a video from Pakistan, which was put out,
[Guest]: and that led to riots.
[Guest]: And there have been other instances.
[Guest]: In Pune, there was a Muslim boy, a techie, was killed
[Guest]: because there was a morphed image which was circulated of a Hindu idol.
[Guest]: And there were riots, and this guy had nothing to do with any of this.
[Guest]: He was just going back to his home or to work, and he got killed.
[Guest]: So we were seeing that,
[Guest]: these manifestations of misinformation in the society.
[Guest]: And so that was the fear that, you know,
[Guest]: this video could lead to a riot.
[Guest]: And, you know, you'd write really, you know, sort of put out,
[Guest]: try to put it out as far as possible.
[Guest]: The language, even back then,
[Guest]: we have changed some of those articles now,
[Guest]: but even our language back then,
[Guest]: when I read back the way I had written some of those articles,
[Guest]: you could see the fear that, please don't share these,
[Guest]: you know, this is completely false.
[Guest]: We don't write that way anymore.
[Guest]: We have a more professional way of writing things.
[Guest]: But even in the language back then,
[Guest]: I could see that there was a fear inside,
[Guest]: which is why we sort of were doing this very, very,
[Guest]: there was a bit of desperation in the language.
[Amit Varma]: And before we go deeper into the subject of fake news,
[Amit Varma]: I'd also like you to define it for me,
[Amit Varma]: because you've written eloquently about how
[Amit Varma]: there are different kinds of fake news as a distinction
[Amit Varma]: between misinformation and disinformation and so on.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So actually, we hardly ever use the phrase fake news anymore.
[Guest]: We have gone away from using that.
[Guest]: I don't think I have used it even once.
[Amit Varma]: You haven't, I have, in fact.
[Guest]: Yes, we don't use that phrase anymore.
[Guest]: We use misinformation and disinformation or malinformation.
[Guest]: So misinformation is essentially,
[Guest]: first, okay, disinformation is when you know something is false
[Guest]: and you still propagate it.
[Guest]: Misinformation is you're propagating it without,
[Guest]: it is false, but you don't know whether you're,
[Guest]: it is false or not, and you're not bothered to check
[Guest]: and you're still propagating it.
[Guest]: Those are the broad definitions.
[Guest]: So we usually stick to these two terms.
[Guest]: We don't use the, unless it is very, very specifically fake news,
[Guest]: that is a mainstream media is putting it out
[Guest]: and it is fake in nature.
[Guest]: Usually only then, or it has been framed in form of news
[Guest]: and it is completely fake.
[Guest]: You know, very, very few times we use the phrase fake news.
[Amit Varma]: So just to sort of try and illustrate that
[Amit Varma]: and tell me if my illustrations are correct.
[Amit Varma]: So this information would be that if I am a hardcore Hindutva person
[Amit Varma]: and I sent out this message saying that,
[Amit Varma]: look, the Muslim birth rate is nine, which someone once told me,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, the Muslim birth replacement rate is nine
[Amit Varma]: and soon they will be the majority in India.
[Amit Varma]: And I know it's false, but I send it out.
[Amit Varma]: That is disinformation and misinformation would be
[Amit Varma]: if I receive a WhatsApp forward saying shops are running out of sugar
[Amit Varma]: and I have no way of knowing whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but it seems like something I should let people know about
[Amit Varma]: so they can get sugar, though sugar is poison.
[Amit Varma]: And then I forward that out.
[Amit Varma]: So that is misinformation.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you just said something which is really interesting
[Amit Varma]: and I also want to now ask you about that,
[Amit Varma]: which is the two ways in which misinformation or disinformation originates.
[Amit Varma]: Like people have this impression about misinformation, disinformation,
[Amit Varma]: fake news, whatever, for the purpose of convenience,
[Amit Varma]: I'll just call it fake news for now.
[Amit Varma]: But people have this impression about it that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, it's these political IT cell fake news factories
[Amit Varma]: which are churning these out and there are workers
[Amit Varma]: who have been paid to sit and write these WhatsApp messages
[Amit Varma]: and they are sort of forwarded out.
[Amit Varma]: But what you've indicated in this episode
[Amit Varma]: and what you once told me in a conversation we had a long time ago
[Amit Varma]: with regard to the Rohit Sardana case, for example,
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a lot of this misinformation happens organically,
[Amit Varma]: that there is a market for it.
[Amit Varma]: And because there is a market of willing consumers for fake news,
[Amit Varma]: people create fake news just to sort of get clicks, make money, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Is it necessary that there is a political motivation or something like that?
[Guest]: I wouldn't say there's a market for consuming fake news or misinformation.
[Guest]: There's a market for consuming sensationalism.
[Guest]: A lot of media organizations indulge in that
[Guest]: purely because there's a market for it.
[Guest]: So, for example, once there was this tweet,
[Guest]: this social media trend called I support Rohit Sardana,
[Guest]: and it was claimed that there are some X number of fatwas
[Guest]: which were issued against Rohit Sardana.
[Guest]: And by evening, Rohit Sardana came out and clarified that
[Guest]: there's no such thing that has happened.
[Guest]: Please, you know, stay away from misinformation
[Guest]: and thank you for the support.
[Guest]: So I went and dug into this and tried to figure out where this originated from.
[Guest]: And it took me to a website, completely unknown website,
[Guest]: which had first put this and then multiple of these right-wing websites
[Guest]: that carried in.
[Guest]: Just to sort of think of that this is not limited to right-wing.
[Guest]: It is across ideological spectrums.
[Guest]: Just want to put it out.
[Guest]: But it definitely started more in the right-wing.
[Guest]: Anyway, so going back to the conversation.
[Guest]: So I tracked this website and we wrote a story.
[Guest]: I found the Facebook profile of this person.
[Guest]: He looked like a very young kid.
[Guest]: And on his Facebook profile, there were two screenshots
[Guest]: of him getting advertising money from a couple of advertising companies.
[Guest]: You know, some 18,000 rupees in all, I think.
[Guest]: We wrote the story.
[Guest]: And I forgot about it.
[Guest]: Next day, I get a message from an anonymous WhatsApp number
[Guest]: saying that he said this in Hindi.
[Guest]: So then I got his phone number and I spoke with him
[Guest]: and it turned out that he was a class 12 boy who was studying in Ranchi.
[Guest]: His father was a farm help in a village outside Ranchi,
[Guest]: earning 6,000 rupees a month.
[Guest]: And he said that to pay my expense, this is what I do.
[Guest]: And interestingly, I spoke with somebody similar just a few days ago.
[Guest]: But this was in 2017.
[Guest]: And he said that you got one detail wrong.
[Guest]: I don't make 20,000 rupees a month.
[Guest]: I make 40,000 rupees a month.
[Guest]: But then I tried to tell him that, you know,
[Guest]: look, you're going to get into trouble at some point in time.
[Guest]: And eventually, I think he shut down the website.
[Guest]: I don't know what he's doing at this point in time.
[Guest]: And this kid said something very interesting.
[Guest]: He said that only if I put this misinformation,
[Guest]: look, so many websites are covered.
[Guest]: He said it as a matter of pride that there's this other website
[Guest]: called hindutva.info, which was sort of a very popular website
[Guest]: at that point in time.
[Guest]: And he said, look, hindutva.info has also written about it.
[Guest]: And he knew that it was completely false.
[Guest]: He's like, people only read when you write these things.
[Guest]: So there's a market for sensationalism.
[Guest]: I wouldn't say there's a market for, you know, misinformation per se.
[Guest]: There's a lot of misinformation in sensationalism.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very nuanced point because I had, in fact, assumed
[Amit Varma]: when I first heard the story from you that, okay, this is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's an organic demand for the, you know, fake news, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: But as you're pointing out, there's an organic demand for sensationalism,
[Amit Varma]: which has always been there.
[Amit Varma]: And the sensational will often be fake.
[Amit Varma]: And often people who are creating this news don't even care
[Amit Varma]: whether it's fake or real, and they don't think too hard
[Amit Varma]: about the consequences.
[Amit Varma]: It's just that you want the clicks and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And, like, over time, as you examine different categories
[Amit Varma]: of misinformation and disinformation,
[Amit Varma]: is it always clear that what is the intent,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you figure out where it originated from?
[Amit Varma]: Or sometimes is it the case that the intent is only sensationalism
[Amit Varma]: and there's no other intent?
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, earlier you mentioned that shops are running
[Amit Varma]: out of sugar, and there was that rumor during Demond.
[Amit Varma]: Like, where would that have originated from and why?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it just something that someone
[Guest]: Very often you can't figure out intent, and it is not always organic.
[Guest]: So this was organic in the sense somebody created.
[Guest]: But I do believe that there are individuals who are tasked to do this.
[Guest]: There's an organized way of putting out misinformation.
[Guest]: And, you know, since the time Altnew started, since the time
[Guest]: we wrote about certain websites, for example, the Postcard News guy,
[Guest]: there's a guy called Mahesh Vikram Hegde who got arrested
[Guest]: based on an Altnew story.
[Guest]: And even my thoughts about, you know, whether people should be
[Guest]: arrested or not have changed.
[Guest]: At that point of time, we wrote an article saying that it
[Guest]: is an achievement, and I think back, and I think that it was
[Guest]: a wrong thing to do.
[Guest]: I don't think he should have been arrested, but we can go to that later.
[Guest]: So what happened was that the fear that you could get arrested,
[Guest]: in the U.S. you are protected by First Amendment,
[Guest]: so which is why there are multiple fake news websites
[Guest]: which continue there because you're not going to get arrested
[Guest]: for writing something.
[Guest]: But here, since there's a fear that you might get arrested,
[Guest]: so that business which had started in 2015-2016 of writing
[Guest]: communal misinformation has more or less stopped.
[Guest]: You don't hear of Postcard News, etc.
[Guest]: There used to be this website called Dhyanik Bharat
[Guest]: that has also gone down.
[Guest]: So that phenomenon has stopped.
[Guest]: So misinformation in order to make money has stopped.
[Guest]: There's other kinds of misinformation like Bollywood, gossip,
[Guest]: you know, that kind.
[Guest]: But communal misinformation, knowing that it could sort of
[Guest]: land you in jail, I think that has come down a lot on websites
[Guest]: in order to make money.
[Guest]: But what has now increased is organized misinformation.
[Guest]: You look at Balakot strikes.
[Guest]: When Balakot strikes happened, that was one of the busiest
[Guest]: times for us.
[Guest]: I mean, there was such a spike of misinformation.
[Guest]: So one of them was a video game which went viral claiming that
[Guest]: you can see a missile honing onto a building and sort of
[Guest]: blasting the building.
[Guest]: And it was claimed that these are Balakot strikes.
[Guest]: Now the person who put out that in the first place,
[Guest]: somebody does not just come across a video and say that,
[Guest]: okay, this is Balakot strikes.
[Guest]: That person knows that let me take this video and put the spin to it.
[Guest]: The first person who has done this.
[Guest]: So that is organized misinformation.
[Guest]: And the fact that when Balakot happened,
[Guest]: so there was another one which was a group of 10 images which
[Guest]: claimed that this is the level of devastation in Pakistan.
[Guest]: And it has reached literally every phone.
[Guest]: I don't know if you've seen those group of 10 images,
[Guest]: but it has almost reached every phone saying that this is the level
[Guest]: of devastation, the picture of dead bodies.
[Guest]: What we found was I think four of them was from a heat stroke in Pakistan.
[Guest]: Four of some others were from an earthquake,
[Guest]: but not a single picture was a recent one.
[Guest]: Now somebody did not come across these pictures and said that,
[Guest]: oh, these are pictures from Balakot.
[Guest]: Somebody put that out with that narrative.
[Guest]: So there are people who are thinking of these narratives and putting
[Guest]: out misinformation that is not organic.
[Guest]: Once it is out on social media, it goes around in an organic manner.
[Guest]: But people, there are people who are sitting there and creating
[Guest]: misinformation and every pattern that you can see now,
[Guest]: it suggests that, you know, for example, during elections,
[Guest]: a lot of misinformation was targeting political leaders.
[Guest]: Okay, so I'll give you an example of Rajnath Singh and Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: So Rajnath Singh was at a rally and he said that,
[Guest]: Chowkidar chaur nahi hai, Chowkidar pure hai. Okay. And he asks the crowd
[Guest]: to repeat that and the crowd repeats Chowkidar pure hai.
[Guest]: They cut the part where Rajnath Singh says this and they only
[Guest]: play the part where the crowd says it.
[Guest]: Now, because you're used to hearing Chowkidar chaur hai,
[Guest]: you think that the crowd is saying Chowkidar chaur hai.
[Guest]: But they were actually saying Chowkidar pure hai and MP Congress's
[Guest]: official verified Twitter handle put out this video saying that,
[Guest]: dekho Rajnath Singh ne kya bulwa diya. Okay.
[Guest]: So now somebody who's cutting it out at that point of time,
[Guest]: you know, I don't know if the person handling MP Congress
[Guest]: handled it or somebody else, most likely somebody else.
[Guest]: But the person who did it knew exactly what the impact will be.
[Guest]: Right. In case of Rahul Gandhi, one of the videos which was extremely viral
[Guest]: where Rahul Gandhi apparently says that women in UP bear 52 children
[Guest]: in every year they bear 52 children.
[Guest]: The context of the story was it is a six-year-old video where Rahul Gandhi,
[Guest]: this was during UPA time when UPA had started a scheme for pregnant women.
[Guest]: If you have institutional delivery, they give you 7,000 or 7,200 rupees.
[Guest]: If you have a home delivery, they give you 3,600 rupees.
[Guest]: This was, I think, funds coming from the union to state.
[Guest]: And according to RTI response, the same woman's name was repeated 52 times.
[Guest]: So as part of the way politicians speak, he said that
[Guest]: UP mein mahila hai 52 bachche deti hai, you know, har saal.
[Guest]: And only that was cut off, you know, that 52 bachche.
[Guest]: And that became so viral.
[Guest]: The funny thing was, so viral to the point that Haryana CM ML Khattar
[Guest]: said that in a speech leading to elections.
[Guest]: There was a BJP candidate from Madhya Pradesh.
[Guest]: I forget which constituency.
[Guest]: He went and said the same thing that Rahul Gandhi ne kaha hai ki
[Guest]: UP mein 52 bachche dete hai mahila hai.
[Guest]: What the folks in Congress did was cut his statement.
[Guest]: So now it would seem that he's saying that UP mein 52 bachche dete hai mahila hai.
[Guest]: And then that second video became viral.
[Guest]: This is nuts.
[Guest]: So again, but people who are doing this and now on, which is why, you know,
[Guest]: earlier I made that it is on both sides of the ideological spectrum.
[Guest]: They know that there is this fault line in our democracy where there is
[Guest]: a huge lack of digital literacy.
[Guest]: They know that people are not in a position to figure out whether
[Guest]: somebody said this or not.
[Guest]: When you cut a clip like that, very convincingly, people will,
[Guest]: there's a huge section of population which will fall for it.
[Guest]: And they have at this point of time, again, I keep going back to saying
[Guest]: that we have not given people tools to figure out what is true, what is not.
[Guest]: We have given them a lot of tools to consume information.
[Guest]: We have not given them a single tool.
[Guest]: There's not a single tool on the phone which will tell you that,
[Guest]: look, this is not true.
[Guest]: This is false.
[Amit Varma]: And as we progress in the episode, I will ask you about the Alt News app,
[Amit Varma]: which I downloaded yesterday.
[Amit Varma]: And I would encourage all my listeners to download the app and try it out.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do that, let's talk about organized misinformation
[Amit Varma]: a little bit more now.
[Amit Varma]: Like, at some point, perhaps around 2016, perhaps afterwards,
[Amit Varma]: these guys realize at a political level that organized misinformation
[Amit Varma]: is the way to go.
[Amit Varma]: People are gullible for sensationalism, so you make anything sensational,
[Amit Varma]: they'll believe it and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And you have these factories set up.
[Amit Varma]: And I assume that the ruling party's factory would have been there first
[Amit Varma]: and would have been sort of much better.
[Amit Varma]: And now everyone does it.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps it's like a hygiene factor.
[Amit Varma]: All parties have to do it.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, you can't survive in the information battle.
[Amit Varma]: But, like, from what you know, what is it like?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how organized are they?
[Amit Varma]: How well manned are they?
[Amit Varma]: What are their processes?
[Amit Varma]: Like, do they just watch videos continuously and news continuously
[Amit Varma]: and decide, okay, we can give it the spin?
[Amit Varma]: Do they have strategic imperatives, heuristics by which they pick things?
[Guest]: I have no insight into that at all.
[Guest]: There's no  and that is where I think we have sort of lacked,
[Guest]: because, you know, a lot of us don't come from a journalistic background.
[Guest]: All of that needs actually getting into these places
[Guest]: and figuring out how things work.
[Guest]: That is something that we have not worked at.
[Guest]: But, you know, a six-year-old video, and the speech was an hour-long speech.
[Guest]: For somebody to find that five-second clip in an hour-long video
[Guest]: and put that out, that means somebody is sitting and, you know,
[Guest]: looking at all these things, seeing how something can be taken out.
[Guest]: So, somebody is spending a lot of time, and somebody has been tasked to do it.
[Guest]: But how exactly this is happening, how people are being paid,
[Guest]: where are they sitting, who's doing this, we have no insight into whatsoever.
[Amit Varma]: And, in fact, two thoughts strike me here.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that it's really, I have to say here, a failure of journalism.
[Amit Varma]: This is something that our mass media should really
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is basic investigative journalism.
[Amit Varma]: It's probably the most important story of our times
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the threats that our democracy faces.
[Amit Varma]: And it's astonishing that some embedded reporter somewhere
[Amit Varma]: hasn't done a journalistic story on this.
[Amit Varma]: I think Swati Chaturvedi, of course, wrote a book about the trolls of the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: But that's, like, kind of different.
[Amit Varma]: And I recorded an episode last week with Akshay Mukul,
[Amit Varma]: who's written the book on the Gita Press, which
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't know which of these episodes will get released first.
[Amit Varma]: But  and what struck me during that episode with him is
[Amit Varma]: that this whole mission of spreading misinformation
[Amit Varma]: with strategic and tactical intent is not something
[Amit Varma]: that has happened because of technology.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps it's been amplified by technology today,
[Amit Varma]: enabled at a much larger scale.
[Amit Varma]: But right from the early days of the Gita Press
[Amit Varma]: and their monthly journal Kalyan, which was set up in 1926,
[Amit Varma]: it has been a regular thing.
[Amit Varma]: The editor of Kalyan, Hanuman Prasad Poddar,
[Amit Varma]: used to write editorials which had fake news,
[Amit Varma]: whether it's about Hindu women being abducted and raped or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And this information, as you put it, not misinformation,
[Amit Varma]: with a specific malafide intent,
[Amit Varma]: and it would seem technology has just taken it to a whole new level.
[Amit Varma]: And is it the case, as people often say,
[Amit Varma]: that it's far easier to spread misinformation
[Amit Varma]: than to actually then spread the fact-checking of it?
[Amit Varma]: Fake news travels faster than fact-checking.
[Amit Varma]: Is that true? What are your thoughts?
[Guest]: I'm not ready to buy that story.
[Guest]: Yes, there has been research done in this.
[Guest]: Science, a very popular science magazine, Science,
[Guest]: put out that tweets which have misinformation,
[Guest]: they sort of go much further.
[Guest]: But again, I keep coming back to the thing
[Guest]: that where is the... you not enable people.
[Guest]: You know, we have seen...
[Guest]: So, for example, the case of vaccination.
[Guest]: There was a time when there were people
[Guest]: who were dying of certain common ailments
[Guest]: which now are gone because of vaccination.
[Guest]: And the society and the governments across the world,
[Guest]: they took it upon themselves to spread the word.
[Guest]: Now, even somebody who doesn't have any idea about vaccination,
[Guest]: that person goes and gets their child vaccinated.
[Guest]: They have no clue, but they've just been told
[Guest]: that you have to vaccinate your child, right?
[Guest]: So, I do believe that once you enable people enough,
[Guest]: there is a way to sort of push back on misinformation.
[Guest]: Yes, there are biases.
[Guest]: It may not be a one-on-one example
[Guest]: of what I'm saying with vaccination,
[Guest]: but there are certain...
[Guest]: And people have certain biases,
[Guest]: so they're more likely to believe
[Guest]: one misinformation over another.
[Guest]: We have all those challenges,
[Guest]: but over the past two and a half years,
[Guest]: we have seen that people are willing to go
[Guest]: beyond what their inherent biases are.
[Guest]: We have had about 10 million views,
[Guest]: or more than 10 million views.
[Guest]: During the election time, only we had about 4 million views
[Guest]: over the past four months.
[Guest]: And I think there are at least a good 50,000 to 100,000 people
[Guest]: who read Alt News on a regular basis,
[Guest]: who may not be consuming every story,
[Guest]: but consume multiple stories.
[Guest]: And I think that I have seen these people.
[Guest]: I know that if you look at their Twitter timeline, et cetera,
[Guest]: you know that they support a particular dispensation,
[Guest]: or they are against a certain dispensation, either of them.
[Guest]: But I have seen many of them, people,
[Guest]: go against their inherent biases
[Guest]: and tag Alt News on Twitter or other places.
[Guest]: Pratik, can you check, is this true?
[Guest]: Alt News, can you check, is this true?
[Guest]: So, I think there is a way
[Guest]: of creating critical thought in the society
[Guest]: when some person is told again and again
[Guest]: that, look, what you got yesterday,
[Guest]: what you got the day before yesterday, et cetera, is false.
[Guest]: And when you do that again and again,
[Guest]: there is a point in time when that person will be,
[Guest]: okay, let me first check whether this is true or false or not.
[Guest]: And I believe that that is the model
[Guest]: that we are hoping can be replicated on a larger scale.
[Guest]: And once that is done, you know, at this point of time,
[Guest]: in case of India, most of the misinformation on WhatsApp,
[Guest]: and I keep coming back to the point,
[Guest]: you can keep talking about,
[Guest]: yes, people are putting out misinformation,
[Guest]: but what has anybody done for them to be able to counter that?
[Guest]: So, when you don't have that,
[Guest]: let's say when you don't have a vaccination of misinformation,
[Guest]: then what is the point of research
[Guest]: which says that misinformation travels faster?
[Guest]: That is where I am.
[Guest]: Yes, maybe three years hence when we have more tools
[Guest]: and when that research is done,
[Guest]: I would take that research more seriously than what I do now.
[Amit Varma]: This episode is proceeding along far more optimistic lines
[Amit Varma]: than I had assumed.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: and we'll return to the conversation.
[Unknown]: Hey, everybody, welcome to another awesome week
[Unknown]: on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you are not following us on social media,
[Unknown]: please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM Podcasts on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.
[Unknown]: You know, I have been asking you guys to do this.
[Unknown]: I think some of you are, but some of you aren't.
[Unknown]: Have you told your best friend about your favorite podcast?
[Unknown]: Please make sure you do that as well.
[Unknown]: You are our ambassadors.
[Unknown]: If you don't go out and evangelize on our behalf,
[Unknown]: who's going to do it?
[Unknown]: So, please go out and tell somebody
[Unknown]: about the podcast you're listening to.
[Unknown]: If you think there's somebody who would enjoy it,
[Unknown]: refer them to IBM Podcasts and tell them about
[Unknown]: all the stuff that they can find on our app
[Unknown]: or on our website or, you know, Spotify, Saavn,
[Unknown]: everywhere you're listening to podcasts, right?
[Unknown]: Just give it a shot.
[Unknown]: Also, guys, I'm going to be at Podcast Movement
[Unknown]: the coming week from the 13th to 16th of August.
[Unknown]: Podcast Movement is a conference in Orlando
[Unknown]: where we're going to be doing all kinds of podcast-y stuff.
[Unknown]: So, check it out.
[Unknown]: If you're in the area, please do come by and say hi.
[Unknown]: If you're not in the area, you can follow along with me
[Unknown]: by following, I guess, my social media.
[Unknown]: In this case, it's Doshi Amit on most things.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by renowned filmmaker,
[Unknown]: writer, and producer, Anees Bazmi.
[Unknown]: He talks about his work as a child artist,
[Unknown]: the changing canvas of Bollywood,
[Unknown]: the role of the screenwriter in it,
[Unknown]: his slate of blockbusters with Salman Khan in the late 2000s.
[Unknown]: I really think this was a fun conversation.
[Unknown]: Anees is a really fun guy to listen to.
[Unknown]: On 9XM Soundcast, Eva Bhatt is joined by
[Unknown]: popular Punjabi singer, Milind Gaba.
[Unknown]: They talk about his strong belief in spirituality
[Unknown]: and how his love for melody changed his destiny.
[Unknown]: On Ganatantra, Alok and Saryu discuss
[Unknown]: the abrogation of Article 370
[Unknown]: and its implication on the future of Indian federalism.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati Podcast, Pawan talks to
[Unknown]: Dr. Mandira Kala and Shampuvi Nayak
[Unknown]: about the pros and cons of the DNA technology regulation bill.
[Unknown]: On Marbles Lost and Found, Zain and Avanti
[Unknown]: talk to musical artist, Bhrigu Sahani,
[Unknown]: about learning to express yourself through journaling.
[Unknown]: On States of Anarchy, peace educator, Chintan Modi,
[Unknown]: joins Hamsini Hariharan to discuss
[Unknown]: what peace between India and Pakistan could look like.
[Unknown]: On Keeping It Queer, Naveen and Farhad
[Unknown]: talk about emergence of TikTok comedy
[Unknown]: and how it allows gender bending.
[Unknown]: On our Kannada Podcast, Thalle Harate,
[Unknown]: Dr. Harini Nagendra joins Surya and Pawan
[Unknown]: to talk about trees, their connection with cities
[Unknown]: and their history in Bangalore.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Pratik Sinha,
[Amit Varma]: founder of AltNews, about
[Amit Varma]: misinformation, disinformation,
[Amit Varma]: malinformation, and the resistant
[Amit Varma]: movement against falsehood.
[Amit Varma]: Though that's my phrasing, not his.
[Amit Varma]: Pratik, you were telling me earlier
[Amit Varma]: before this that there was
[Amit Varma]: a specific reasoning to
[Amit Varma]: your setting up AltNews as
[Amit Varma]: a not-for-profit as opposed to a for-profit.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I was making the argument
[Amit Varma]: coming from where I come from that, look, I think you're
[Amit Varma]: creating something of enormous value.
[Amit Varma]: And what I would really love to see is you
[Amit Varma]: guys flourish as a for-profit company
[Amit Varma]: where consumers will recognize that value
[Amit Varma]: and there's a means of your getting rewarded
[Amit Varma]: for that. But you told
[Amit Varma]: me that, no, you set up as a not-for-profit
[Amit Varma]: for a specific reason.
[Guest]: Can you go through that?
[Guest]: Right. So, AltNews,
[Guest]: there are two things that
[Guest]: we are trying to experiment. One is
[Guest]: how to promote critical thought in the society
[Guest]: and debunking misinformation
[Guest]: is a means to that.
[Guest]: The other thing that we are experimenting
[Guest]: is how to set up a media
[Guest]: organization in a democracy
[Guest]: where the institutions are being
[Guest]: compromised, right? So,
[Guest]: let's say if you take the example of
[Guest]: US and right now
[Guest]: there's New York Times, Washington
[Guest]: Post, CNN. They are going hammer and tongs
[Guest]: against Trump, but you don't see
[Guest]: them being raided every other
[Guest]: day. There's still space
[Guest]: for people to talk against the government.
[Guest]: In India, the media has gone
[Guest]: exactly the opposite way where
[Guest]: there's very little criticism of
[Guest]: the government that is coming out.
[Guest]: And I think a part of the
[Guest]: reason is because
[Guest]: there's so much money
[Guest]: that goes into media and there are these big investors
[Guest]: who are putting in money and
[Guest]: in India, we keep
[Guest]: talking about ease of doing business,
[Guest]: but we know as a matter of
[Guest]: fact that even if somebody wants to be,
[Guest]: wants to do an honest business,
[Guest]: that person has to cut so many
[Guest]: corners. And
[Guest]: eventually, let's say this person thinks
[Guest]: that he wants to invest in a cause such as
[Guest]: Alt News and puts his
[Guest]: or her money and then
[Guest]: what happens is the government goes after
[Guest]: them and their tax rates,
[Guest]: even if there's nothing, they'll
[Guest]: try to harass you.
[Guest]: And that is when either the
[Guest]: investor pulls out, which means that you
[Guest]: started something, you're dependent on an investor and suddenly
[Guest]: you don't have the money. So you have to let go people,
[Guest]: the thing dies.
[Guest]: Or the investor says,
[Guest]: can you not write about this? You write about these things.
[Guest]: And then day after day
[Guest]: that things about
[Guest]: can you not write about this, that category
[Guest]: keeps increasing. And eventually
[Guest]: you're completely stifled.
[Guest]: So I think that is what
[Guest]: has happened with a lot of media organizations
[Guest]: today, either of
[Guest]: these two phenomena. So when we
[Guest]: started Alt News, the first idea was
[Guest]: how to keep it sustained
[Guest]: without getting a big ticket
[Guest]: investor into the picture and
[Guest]: by educating people
[Guest]: that they need to
[Guest]: willingly donate to such
[Guest]: an organization if they want
[Guest]: something which is without a filter.
[Guest]: Because again, I keep saying that
[Guest]: this is across political
[Guest]: ideologies and if tomorrow
[Guest]: there's a new government in power,
[Guest]: let's say if there is a change,
[Guest]: they will have the same kind of
[Guest]: animosity or
[Guest]: they are not going to be huge fans
[Guest]: of Alt News just because
[Guest]: now they are in power and now they are promoting.
[Guest]: It's the same thing that happened with Ravish.
[Guest]: There are many people who, during
[Guest]: UPA time, many people who were
[Guest]: opposed to UPA were big supporters
[Guest]: of Ravish. And now the same
[Guest]: people don't like Ravish. So it happens
[Guest]: in this journalism cycle.
[Guest]: So we wanted something which is
[Guest]: completely funded by people, create
[Guest]: again, it is part of educating
[Guest]: people that you need to
[Guest]: give us money if you want us to keep doing it, depending
[Guest]: on your resources. There are kids,
[Guest]: there are college kids who will give
[Guest]: 10 rupees. The minimum donation for Alt News
[Guest]: is 9 rupees. They'll give 10 rupees
[Guest]: and they'll say that,
[Guest]: if I get a job, I'll give more money
[Guest]: but please keep doing what you're doing.
[Guest]: That is what we want to see
[Guest]: in people. People willing to give money
[Guest]: because they know that, number one,
[Guest]: they become a part of the whole thing.
[Guest]: They have a sense of ownership. And second,
[Guest]: that they know that
[Guest]: it's only through their money can they
[Guest]: get honest journalism.
[Guest]: So, in a democracy where institutions
[Guest]: are compromised,
[Guest]: you need to devise newer
[Guest]: and newer methods to keep
[Guest]: these organizations running. I'm not saying that
[Guest]: this will work for everybody. For example,
[Guest]: yesterday I was speaking to another
[Guest]: gentleman and he told me
[Guest]: that your model will never work for me
[Guest]: because Alt News has a certain political
[Guest]: impact. So, people tend to
[Guest]: give more donation but
[Guest]: if I'm working on rural journalism,
[Guest]: nobody is going to give me money. So, it is not that
[Guest]: this model will work for everybody but there
[Guest]: are at least a certain group of media organizations
[Guest]: for whom this model could work.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point you make.
[Amit Varma]: And Ravish, of course, we're recording this on August 4th.
[Amit Varma]: Ravish just this week got the
[Amit Varma]: RCA award and more power to him.
[Amit Varma]: And what good journalists do like Ravish
[Amit Varma]: and what you are also doing,
[Amit Varma]: though you're not doing journalism, but what you're also doing
[Amit Varma]: is constantly speaking truth to power
[Amit Varma]: and that necessarily means that whoever
[Amit Varma]: is in power won't like you very much.
[Amit Varma]: And for the benefit of my listeners, I just
[Amit Varma]: kind of want to elaborate on this because
[Amit Varma]: this is not something we recognize. It is
[Amit Varma]: impossible for any business
[Amit Varma]: in India today to be compliant
[Amit Varma]: with the law. Just as an illustration
[Amit Varma]: of that, I had an episode a long time back on
[Amit Varma]: regulations where the guest
[Amit Varma]: I was doing that episode with told me
[Amit Varma]: that when he was running a restaurant,
[Amit Varma]: he found that there were two
[Amit Varma]: contradictory regulations he had
[Amit Varma]: to comply with. One was
[Amit Varma]: the excise regulation, which was controlling
[Amit Varma]: the sale of alcohol on the premises
[Amit Varma]: even though he had a license for it, but they
[Amit Varma]: controlled it. And their
[Amit Varma]: regulation was that there can only be one
[Amit Varma]: entry to the restaurant
[Amit Varma]: so they can monitor how alcohol
[Amit Varma]: is being taken in and out. And
[Amit Varma]: meanwhile, the fire safety department
[Amit Varma]: had regulations that every restaurant
[Amit Varma]: has to have multiple doors. So
[Amit Varma]: basically what this meant was for my friend running a
[Amit Varma]: restaurant is that he could not comply with
[Amit Varma]: both their opposite regulations. So he was always
[Amit Varma]: breaking the law and effectively he was
[Amit Varma]: bribing both people and he was actually
[Amit Varma]: bribing 40 people a month, which is what
[Amit Varma]: most businesses face. And every
[Amit Varma]: single business in some way or the other will be
[Amit Varma]: breaking the law. If you really want to go after them,
[Amit Varma]: you can, you'll find something or the other.
[Amit Varma]: Now the issue with our big media houses
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, the companies that own
[Amit Varma]: them and run them are not only into media,
[Amit Varma]: they're in a lot of other businesses.
[Amit Varma]: You know, for example, the company
[Amit Varma]: that runs HD media will have a lot of
[Amit Varma]: other business interests. They'll have chemical factories,
[Amit Varma]: they'll have this, they'll have that. And the government
[Amit Varma]: will choose to put pressure on one of those
[Amit Varma]: till the message comes across that
[Amit Varma]: boss, you better behave, otherwise the
[Amit Varma]: whole edifice could collapse. And
[Amit Varma]: you see this and this pressure comes
[Amit Varma]: from across governments.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like recently when Bobby Ghosh
[Amit Varma]: of HD started the hate tracker,
[Amit Varma]: boom, he had to leave, he was asked
[Amit Varma]: to leave. But a few years earlier
[Amit Varma]: when Chidambaram
[Amit Varma]: was upset at Raju Narasetty,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Raju was out of there soon enough.
[Amit Varma]: In both cases, political
[Amit Varma]: pressure applied. We don't know the exact
[Amit Varma]: method in which it was applied. Both men
[Amit Varma]: made graceful exits. But this
[Amit Varma]: is essentially what happened. So any established
[Amit Varma]: media house, therefore, you can
[Amit Varma]: put so much pressure on them that independent
[Amit Varma]: journalism becomes hard, which is a separate
[Amit Varma]: subject and a separate rant
[Amit Varma]: I often go on to and there are people
[Amit Varma]: like Scroll and Wire and Alt News
[Amit Varma]: which are fighting the good fight.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, rant over.
[Guest]: I just wanted to elaborate.
[Guest]: And I want to make an additional point. This is not just
[Guest]: limited to media organisations.
[Guest]: It extends to every organisation.
[Guest]: So, for example, I have this
[Guest]: inherent trust deficit when it
[Guest]: comes to organisations like Facebook,
[Guest]: Google and Twitter, in terms of a variety
[Guest]: of things. So, for example, there's a huge
[Guest]: issue of privacy going on, right?
[Guest]: So tomorrow, let's say a
[Guest]: government comes after any of these organisations.
[Guest]: Again, when they're
[Guest]: operating in India, they're operating according to the
[Guest]: law of the Indian. They're not operating
[Guest]: according to US laws. They're operating according to Indian laws.
[Guest]: And when somebody goes after them
[Guest]: and says that give me this data,
[Guest]: their choice is to
[Guest]: let a billion dollar company
[Guest]: go or give the data of
[Guest]: a few individuals that the government wants.
[Guest]: And I think they'll always take this
[Guest]: other route.
[Guest]: And that also has to
[Guest]: do with multiple decisions that they
[Guest]: make, that they always want to keep the
[Guest]: government happy. So, it is not just
[Guest]: limited to media organisations.
[Guest]: This applies to many other organisations
[Guest]: who are impacting us in their
[Guest]: day-to-day life. Social media
[Guest]: and these chat apps are the
[Guest]: medium for misinformation. And
[Guest]: their inability
[Guest]: to have done anything about
[Guest]: or doing enough about this,
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: it is also because they don't want to
[Amit Varma]: go on the wrong side of the government.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point. And a lot of fake news,
[Amit Varma]: as you mentioned, happens on WhatsApp,
[Amit Varma]: but it also happens on other media. But WhatsApp is
[Amit Varma]: one of the major, this thing is owned by
[Amit Varma]: Facebook and so on. And
[Amit Varma]: we've seen them do little things like, for example,
[Amit Varma]: when a message is forwarded, that stamp comes
[Amit Varma]: on it, forwarded, so people kind of know.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure it makes some difference.
[Amit Varma]: But in general,
[Amit Varma]: a three-part question, what is
[Amit Varma]: it that they can do about it, the
[Amit Varma]: tech companies, in terms of
[Amit Varma]: whether it's Facebook
[Amit Varma]: figuring out that, you know, what's making
[Amit Varma]: it harder for people to spread
[Amit Varma]: fake news on WhatsApp or Google changing
[Amit Varma]: its search algos in such a way that fake news
[Amit Varma]: sites don't come up in the results and so on?
[Amit Varma]: Number one, what can tech companies do about
[Amit Varma]: it? Number two, how
[Amit Varma]: effective is pressure from
[Amit Varma]: civil society on these
[Amit Varma]: tech companies to change
[Amit Varma]: their behaviour? And number three,
[Amit Varma]: in your experience, how seriously
[Amit Varma]: are companies actually taking this?
[Guest]: So, I think
[Guest]: that is a very big question.
[Guest]: I don't think I have answers to everything, but
[Guest]: I do understand some of the
[Guest]: tech that is going in. I'll give you a
[Guest]: quick example. Let's say when an image
[Guest]: or video goes viral and which has an element
[Guest]: of misinformation, the pattern is
[Guest]: that it will be shared from thousands
[Guest]: of accounts with almost
[Guest]: identical text. This is the pattern
[Guest]: that we see. Okay, so
[Guest]: for example, there was this video
[Guest]: which went viral which said that
[Guest]: in Hyderabad,
[Guest]: a Marwadi woman was killed
[Guest]: for not wearing a burqa
[Guest]: in a heart-wrenching video.
[Guest]: Share it so much that it
[Guest]: reaches Modi ji and Modi ji takes instant action.
[Guest]: This was a
[Guest]: four and a half minute video, one of the
[Guest]: first videos that we debunked, which was
[Guest]: the most grotesque video you'll see.
[Guest]: A young woman
[Guest]: was beaten up and burnt
[Guest]: and the video recording stops only
[Guest]: when she dies of those burns.
[Guest]: Now, this is being claimed that
[Guest]: it started with that this is a Marwadi woman
[Guest]: burnt because of not wearing a burqa.
[Guest]: She married in a Muslim family,
[Guest]: did not wear a burqa. The video is actually from
[Guest]: Gautamala. The
[Guest]: case was that there was
[Guest]: three people, including this girl, they
[Guest]: allegedly shot a taxi driver. The mob came
[Guest]: after them. The two guys could
[Guest]: run away. She got caught in a mob and
[Guest]: she was killed. Now,
[Guest]: whenever you see these videos, and we
[Guest]: would put the screenshots when
[Guest]: we write and alt-use articles to show the extent
[Guest]: of spread, you'll
[Guest]: see that the same text that I
[Guest]: said, word to word, will be copy
[Guest]: pasted across many, many, many
[Guest]: accounts and the same video.
[Guest]: So there is a pattern. Whenever there's a
[Guest]: pattern, technology is very good at recognizing
[Guest]: patterns. What Facebook
[Guest]: has done now, for example, is
[Guest]: that they have
[Guest]: teamed up with various fact-checkers like
[Guest]: BoomLive, etc. BoomLive is doing very good
[Guest]: work. And so, these fact-checkers are supposed
[Guest]: to go and point at instances
[Guest]: of misinformation. That, you know,
[Guest]: this is a video and this is the actual
[Guest]: fact. And that is where now you
[Guest]: see that thing on Facebook which says that
[Guest]: this has been fact-checked and you can
[Guest]: read this fact-check. You know, so Facebook
[Guest]: is trying to say that we are doing something about it.
[Guest]: But the thing is that fact-checkers
[Guest]: are humans. They are not going to be able to mark
[Guest]: 10,000 instances of it. They are
[Guest]: only going to be able to mark 2, 3,
[Guest]: 4, 5 instances of it.
[Guest]: The rest of the
[Guest]: 9,995, that is where tech comes
[Guest]: into picture. That is where
[Guest]: if you really want to sort of fight
[Guest]: against misinformation
[Guest]: and many times
[Guest]: on Facebook things are shared privately. I won't even see
[Guest]: it in public, you know, with that private status
[Guest]: you're sharing it only amongst friends.
[Guest]: If you really want to sort of go
[Guest]: after misinformation, then mark everything
[Guest]: as false using tech.
[Guest]: That is one example that you can do.
[Guest]: And especially political
[Guest]: misinformation always follows a pattern
[Guest]: because it is different from medical
[Guest]: misinformation. Here you are generating complete
[Guest]: fiction. You're taking a video from Gautam
[Guest]: Ala and you're saying this.
[Guest]: That story is never going to change
[Guest]: throughout the duration of
[Guest]: that particular misinformation.
[Guest]: It is very easy to take down
[Guest]: every instance using tech.
[Guest]: So that is my grouse that
[Guest]: they have not done it. For example, Snopes.com
[Guest]: had a partnership
[Guest]: with Facebook for the same thing and
[Guest]: they withdrew from the partnership.
[Guest]: I think two companies have withdrawn, two big companies
[Guest]: from Facebook because they said that
[Guest]: it is a completely manual process. Give us an API.
[Guest]: We don't see that we are making
[Guest]: impact.
[Guest]: This is a common grouse that
[Guest]: people have with these platforms.
[Guest]: My question is why have they not done this?
[Guest]: Again, when we talk about the
[Guest]: all-tunes app, we can speak about it.
[Guest]: That is exactly what we're doing. You feed us a video,
[Guest]: you feed us an image and we'll tell you
[Guest]: this is the story corresponding to it.
[Guest]: So that is number one.
[Guest]: Tech can do a lot of things, even in terms
[Guest]: of rankings, etc. My
[Guest]: experience in tech is limited to Wi-Fi
[Guest]: and embedded systems, so it's like an orthopedic
[Guest]: talking about neuroscience.
[Guest]: I'll talk about what I understand, but I
[Guest]: do know, I do understand that
[Guest]: there are solutions. The second
[Amit Varma]: question was? The second question was
[Amit Varma]: what are the ways in which people
[Amit Varma]: in civil society can put pressure on
[Amit Varma]: tech companies and do they take it seriously?
[Guest]: They do take it seriously and which is
[Guest]: why they do things like WhatsApp saying that
[Guest]: we'll limit the forward limit to five.
[Guest]: We're going to put the forwarder tag. I think
[Guest]: the latest thing that they are going to roll out is
[Guest]: frequently forwarded. It is not
[Guest]: just forwarded and it is frequently forwarded.
[Guest]: They have not released any statistics
[Guest]: internally as to whether
[Guest]: it is a successful
[Guest]: strategy or not, and I don't
[Guest]: have any data to speak of, but observationally
[Guest]: over elections, this forwarder thing
[Guest]: came before elections. Observationally
[Guest]: over elections, I don't see it having
[Guest]: any impact.
[Guest]: Again, we have to continuously
[Guest]: acknowledge that misinformation
[Guest]: during these elections was an organized
[Guest]: attempt. So instead of one
[Guest]: person putting it out to
[Guest]: 100 groups in one time, you'll have to put
[Guest]: it out to five groups at one point in time.
[Guest]: There was a story by Huffington
[Guest]: Post about how a simple tool
[Guest]: made to hack WhatsApp
[Guest]: web, not hack as in sort of use
[Guest]: that to put out bulk misinformation
[Guest]: was used. So there are means and ways
[Guest]: of getting around these. These are not
[Guest]: the solutions and
[Guest]: I keep calling
[Guest]: this as their way of fighting.
[Guest]: It's a PR battle that they are fighting.
[Guest]: They are not trying to solve
[Guest]: an issue. So when there
[Guest]: is pressure either from the government
[Guest]: or from civil society, they do
[Guest]: these little things to show that
[Guest]: they are working on things, but these
[Amit Varma]: are not concrete solutions. And that
[Amit Varma]: already kind of answers my third question
[Amit Varma]: which is what tech companies are doing about it
[Amit Varma]: and would it be fair to then sum that up
[Amit Varma]: and say that what they are essentially
[Amit Varma]: doing is reactive. They are reacting
[Amit Varma]: either to government pressure or to
[Amit Varma]: civil society pressure in sort of
[Amit Varma]: jugar ways that okay, there's a PR
[Amit Varma]: shitstorm happening, let's control it by doing this
[Amit Varma]: but not really thinking deeper
[Amit Varma]: about what the problem is and let's proactively
[Amit Varma]: figure out ways to fix it and see what would be coming.
[Guest]: It is reactive and
[Guest]: so for example, what happened in Myanmar
[Guest]: let's say, you know, it is
[Guest]: my understanding of social media
[Guest]: and world in general is that if something
[Guest]: happens one place, it is going
[Guest]: to repeat in patterns in other places.
[Guest]: So what happened in Myanmar was this
[Guest]: Rohingya thing and Facebook
[Guest]: you know, a lot of misinformation on Facebook
[Guest]: then it happened in Sri Lanka, it happened in Philippines
[Guest]: so there's a pattern.
[Guest]: Again, we should not forget
[Guest]: that media tech companies are not the
[Guest]: only stakeholders. I'm not saying that
[Guest]: all the blame lies with tech companies
[Guest]: there's a huge amount of blame which lies with
[Guest]: government, especially the child kidnapping
[Guest]: rumors, I would put the blame much more on
[Guest]: government than the tech companies
[Guest]: and we should talk about it.
[Guest]: But despite that, you know
[Guest]: I don't think they have
[Guest]: done enough, even though they know that for example
[Guest]: child kidnapping rumors are viral again
[Guest]: we just wrote last week
[Guest]: six, I think five to six articles about how
[Guest]: these child kidnapping rumors are viral
[Guest]: and we actually sent it to the rep in Whatsapp
[Guest]: we put it out, we said that
[Guest]: and we did not blame Whatsapp in the tweet
[Guest]: we put out, we said that it is the police
[Guest]: and government which has to take note of it
[Guest]: because in this, there's a very limited thing
[Guest]: that Whatsapp can do. Last year
[Guest]: when the child kidnapping rumors happened
[Guest]: what eventually helped is not this
[Guest]: changing or forwarding limit, none of that
[Guest]: because the child
[Guest]: kidnapping rumor was there over
[Guest]: and it is a very very interesting phenomenon
[Guest]: maybe we should talk about it. Let's talk about it now
[Guest]: yeah, so
[Guest]: it was there over a certain period of time
[Guest]: and it created a fear
[Guest]: so for example, people in
[Guest]: rural Telangana, Telangana gets as
[Guest]: hot as Ahmedabad or Delhi etc
[Guest]: and there's a lot of poverty there and people
[Guest]: would come out of their houses in summers to
[Guest]: sleep. This
[Guest]: last summer, they would sleep inside
[Guest]: the house and they
[Guest]: created this self vigilante groups to look for
[Guest]: these child kidnappers. What did this
[Guest]: rumor say? The rumor said that
[Guest]: it was a
[Guest]: blurb of text with
[Guest]: multiple images and one or two videos
[Guest]: usually. The text said that
[Guest]: there are x number of people, 500-600 people
[Guest]: coming from outside, they are going to
[Guest]: kidnap your children, traffic their organs
[Guest]: and this message has been
[Guest]: sent out by the following
[Guest]: police commissioner. Okay, and then
[Guest]: there are videos of dead people, bloodied people
[Guest]: there is one video which is actually from
[Guest]: Pakistan where
[Guest]: in the original video, there are
[Guest]: two people on bike who come and there
[Guest]: are these little kids who are playing cricket on the street
[Guest]: they pick up a kid and go away and then
[Guest]: they come back and show a placard
[Guest]: saying that this is how easy it is to
[Guest]: kidnap children in Karachi.
[Guest]: That part where they show the placard was cut off
[Guest]: and only the part where
[Guest]: they show the bikers come
[Guest]: and that clip video was
[Guest]: circulated along with this, essentially trying to
[Guest]: say that these are the people on prowl
[Guest]: in your area. Now
[Guest]: few aspects of this, what eventually
[Guest]: stopped it and which is where the government responsibility
[Guest]: comes is that when 30 people died
[Guest]: eventually Mr. Ravi Shankar Prasad made a statement
[Guest]: I know that this is a state law, law
[Guest]: as a matter of a state, but when it is
[Guest]: happening all over the country, that is when the union government
[Guest]: should have reacted much before
[Guest]: and eventually the police
[Guest]: and the administration, they fanned out to
[Guest]: into different areas physically and
[Guest]: telling people that look this is not
[Guest]: true, this is false, this is not true, this is false
[Guest]: this is not true and that is what eventually
[Guest]: stopped the killing. So it is nothing
[Guest]: that Facebook or WhatsApp could do to stop
[Guest]: the killing, it was a quick
[Guest]: educational initiative, a small
[Guest]: you know on just that little point
[Guest]: that look this is, there is fear
[Guest]: among people and all you need is somebody
[Guest]: you trust, an authority to tell
[Guest]: them that this is
[Guest]: not true. That is one aspect of it
[Guest]: which is where I completely blame the
[Guest]: government for what happened and which what
[Guest]: continues to happen that they have not
[Guest]: taken any initiative as far as
[Guest]: digital empowerment is concerned.
[Guest]: But the very interesting part
[Guest]: of these child kidnapping rumours
[Guest]: was that it happened in multiple
[Guest]: states which meant that all these rumours
[Guest]: were being translated.
[Guest]: And as it moved from
[Guest]: town to town, for example
[Guest]: if it is in Kutch it will say that
[Guest]: the Kutch police commissioner has given
[Guest]: this thing. If it is Ahmedabad
[Guest]: it will say Ahmedabad police commissioner has given this thing.
[Guest]: So who is changing that?
[Guest]: Who is changing, in Dhule five
[Guest]: people were killed, it was in Marathi
[Guest]: again it was a local police commissioner.
[Guest]: So what intrigued me and
[Guest]: I don't think anybody has been able to answer that question
[Guest]: was there was somebody who
[Guest]: was changing these things, you know, these tiny
[Guest]: bits of information. Otherwise
[Guest]: the rumour is same, the translation is
[Guest]: same but as it went from
[Guest]: place to place, the name of the police
[Guest]: commissioner it kept changing.
[Guest]: And that intrigued me a lot that who is doing
[Guest]: this? What is the motive? What is the purpose?
[Guest]: You could never figure out and it is
[Guest]: viral again now. There were 15
[Guest]: attacks in Madhya Pradesh when we wrote the article.
[Guest]: Today I haven't confirmed
[Guest]: this but I just read
[Guest]: just before coming to this podcast
[Guest]: that there have been three attacks in Bihar.
[Amit Varma]: I have not confirmed this but I just read about this.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on the morning
[Amit Varma]: of August 5th and it is really
[Amit Varma]: interesting because I can imagine someone starting
[Amit Varma]: that rumour because it is sensational and that
[Amit Varma]: sells and then it is misinformation
[Amit Varma]: where people are spreading it but it is not out of
[Amit Varma]: malice. But then there is an element of
[Amit Varma]: disinformation because people are actually changing the
[Amit Varma]: detail of who the commissioner is and all that.
[Guest]: Do you have any theories on what is going on here?
[Guest]: I have no clue. I don't know
[Guest]: who would do that, why would do that, what is
[Guest]: there to gain? There is no political gain out of it
[Guest]: or at least I don't understand if there is a political gain.
[Amit Varma]: So when I was growing up in the 80s, if the government
[Amit Varma]: wanted to make an announcement, you had one television
[Amit Varma]: channel, Doordarshan and somebody would come
[Amit Varma]: and say okay whatever,
[Amit Varma]: typhoon expected here, don't go out or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: You could do that. Today of course media
[Amit Varma]: is completely dispersed and so on.
[Amit Varma]: How is it then that when misinformation
[Amit Varma]: spreads like this, what is it
[Amit Varma]: that the government can do to correct it?
[Guest]: The government has every tool
[Guest]: at its disposal. Even now you have
[Guest]: All India Radio in villages etc.
[Guest]: I mean these kind of things,
[Guest]: I am not talking about, again there are multiple
[Guest]: different strategies needed to counter different
[Guest]: kind of misinformation but let's talk about these
[Guest]: child kidnapping rumours. There was a person
[Guest]: who was killed in Ahmedabad.
[Guest]: We did a story five days
[Guest]: before this person was killed
[Guest]: and in a city like Ahmedabad,
[Guest]: if you can read a WhatsApp forward, you can read a billboard.
[Guest]: There are billboards at every
[Guest]: crossroad.
[Guest]: All you have to identify is the
[Guest]: areas where people
[Guest]: are more likely to fall for this misinformation
[Guest]: and put billboards
[Guest]: that if you come across this, this is false.
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: there are so many things that can be done.
[Guest]: You ask the radio organisations
[Guest]: to keep broadcasting it.
[Guest]: When there is a need to do it, the government
[Guest]: finds a way. Even now,
[Guest]: for example, Odisha is doing such a good job
[Guest]: at getting people in
[Guest]: shelters because in the last 2-3 years
[Guest]: they have been battered with cyclones
[Guest]: and floods but they have made sure that people
[Guest]: are not caught in the storm
[Guest]: and how do you do that? By communicating
[Guest]: with people. There are means
[Guest]: and ways for the government to communicate with
[Guest]: people. You use those same means
[Guest]: to fight misinformation. It's just that they
[Guest]: have not recognised this
[Guest]: as an issue of high
[Amit Varma]: priority at this point of time.
[Amit Varma]: Odisha government is a great example of
[Amit Varma]: where there was a will, they actually went out
[Amit Varma]: and got it done.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, you could say that there is no rule of law
[Amit Varma]: in most of the countries.
[Amit Varma]: This would classically fall under the rubric
[Amit Varma]: of you need to maintain the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: I want to take you back to a bigger philosophical
[Amit Varma]: question and something that you alluded to
[Amit Varma]: earlier in the show when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how the postcard
[Amit Varma]: news guy got arrested and at first you
[Amit Varma]: welcomed it but then you had second thoughts about it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just
[Amit Varma]: sort of thinking aloud, I'm a free speech
[Amit Varma]: absolutist so I just totally believe
[Amit Varma]: in that you should not
[Amit Varma]: find reasons to clamp down on the free speech
[Amit Varma]: of others. However,
[Amit Varma]: there's also the harm principle.
[Amit Varma]: If someone is actually putting out
[Amit Varma]: information that leads to people
[Amit Varma]: being killed, whether it's people
[Amit Varma]: being lynched or whether it's
[Amit Varma]: child kidnapping rumours, if somebody willfully
[Amit Varma]: does it, then I believe that the law
[Amit Varma]: has a right to sort of take action against him
[Amit Varma]: in only those cases where it's
[Amit Varma]: direct and it's sort of
[Amit Varma]: malified in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: How has your thinking on this evolved?
[Guest]: My thinking on this has evolved
[Guest]: in the sense that, number one, there's no way
[Guest]: to find out who actually put out
[Guest]: this information. We are in a world of
[Guest]: end-to-end encryption, whether it's WhatsApp,
[Guest]: Signal, etc.
[Guest]: So if we ever create laws
[Guest]: more specifically to target misinformation,
[Guest]: number one, what we will be doing
[Guest]: is not criminalising misinformation, we'll be
[Guest]: criminalising information. Misinformation
[Guest]: is a subset of information.
[Guest]: And so what we will be doing is
[Guest]: criminalising information. Now,
[Guest]: there are different kinds of rumours. So, for example,
[Guest]: medical misinformation. When
[Guest]: the Nipah virus thing happened in Kerala,
[Guest]: a message went viral claiming
[Guest]: that if you have
[Guest]: Gelsamium 200, a homeopathic
[Guest]: drug, it will protect you from Nipah virus.
[Guest]: Now, Nipah virus had an
[Guest]: 85% mortality rate.
[Guest]: A rumour like this is very dangerous
[Guest]: at this point in time. But the people
[Guest]: who are forwarding it are again
[Guest]: forwarding it from a position
[Guest]: of fear and concern.
[Guest]: That, you know, it might help somebody who I
[Guest]: know in Kerala.
[Guest]: Or, you know,
[Guest]: there's no malintent here.
[Guest]: Now, if you create a law which
[Guest]: criminalises misinformation
[Guest]: or, as I said, information,
[Guest]: the court is not going to see whether this is
[Guest]: political misinformation, whether there's malintent.
[Guest]: I mean, we know how
[Guest]: judiciary works and there's a
[Guest]: likelihood that somebody who's just put it out
[Guest]: because of genuine concern
[Guest]: gets arrested. First of all, you can never find
[Guest]: out who started that.
[Guest]: And the police, just in order
[Guest]: to make a case that they're doing something, they'll
[Guest]: pick up a couple of people who probably
[Guest]: have nothing to do with the starting of the rumour and
[Guest]: put them into jail. That is how I
[Guest]: see this playing out.
[Guest]: And, again, the same thing
[Guest]: with political misinformation also. A lot of people
[Guest]: are just forwarding it. The creators are
[Guest]: very few and we don't know who the creators are.
[Guest]: There's no insight into who the
[Guest]: creators are. Most of the people are just
[Guest]: forwarding and forwarding. How do you
[Guest]: start arresting people
[Guest]: just because they're forwarding misinformation?
[Guest]: And, again, here I have another point to make,
[Guest]: which is, if you don't
[Guest]: teach a child how to cross a road,
[Guest]: you can't blame a child
[Guest]: when the child crosses a road and is
[Guest]: unable to cross the road. First, teach
[Guest]: the child to cross the road.
[Guest]: We have not taught
[Guest]: people how to deal
[Guest]: with a world where there's so
[Guest]: much excess of information. It's not
[Guest]: just misinformation, there's excess of information.
[Guest]: And how do you deal with it?
[Guest]: You have a cough and
[Guest]: you go on Google and you say that I have a cough.
[Guest]: Depending on what
[Guest]: sort of mental state you are in, you might
[Guest]: conclude that you have cancer or you have
[Guest]: an ordinary cough.
[Guest]: We have not taught people how to deal
[Guest]: with a world where there's so much information.
[Guest]: And in that, when people make
[Guest]: mistakes, to criminalize information
[Guest]: is something that I cannot support.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point and I'll ask you to elaborate
[Amit Varma]: on both these sub-points of
[Amit Varma]: medical misinformation, number one,
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: number two, the need for education.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, is it then fair to sum up your position
[Amit Varma]: on this, to
[Amit Varma]: say that whether or not a
[Amit Varma]: law against willful,
[Amit Varma]: malified disinformation is justified or not,
[Amit Varma]: in practice what will happen is that
[Amit Varma]: any such law will become a very blunt
[Amit Varma]: tool which is used to randomly
[Amit Varma]: crack down on misinformation.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. And therefore
[Guest]: will be a threat to free speech in the hands of the state.
[Guest]: Yes, and especially
[Guest]: again, the way things
[Guest]: go about in India, it will be
[Guest]: used by the ruling party against people
[Guest]: in the opposition. Exactly. So that will
[Guest]: also be a consequence of that, that it will be
[Guest]: used selectively. I mean
[Guest]: the law enforcement agents will
[Guest]: not do their due diligence, that is one part, but
[Guest]: it will be used selectively by the ruling party
[Amit Varma]: against people in the opposition. These are
[Amit Varma]: very wise points and I agree with you entirely. Now
[Amit Varma]: elaborate a little bit, like most people think of
[Amit Varma]: misinformation, disinformation, fake news, whatever
[Amit Varma]: right, as something that is political in nature
[Amit Varma]: or sensational rumours.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you've been pointing out
[Amit Varma]: to me is that medical misinformation is something
[Amit Varma]: that we need to look at very, very seriously. It has
[Amit Varma]: grave consequences. Elaborate on that for me.
[Guest]: So medical misinformation is the other thing
[Guest]: that we concentrate on.
[Guest]: The editor of Alt News Science
[Guest]: is Dr. Sumaya Sheikh. She is a neuroscientist
[Guest]: based in Sweden.
[Guest]: It might be interesting to have a conversation with
[Guest]: her because she's also working on aggression and things like that.
[Guest]: But, so
[Guest]: medical misinformation is
[Guest]: equally dangerous.
[Guest]: So for example, in Gujarat, in certain
[Guest]: villages, there was a rumour that
[Guest]: the measles, rubella
[Guest]: vaccine, RSS has
[Guest]: mixed something in it and
[Guest]: people who will take it
[Guest]: will become
[Guest]: impotent. And the
[Guest]: vaccination rates drop dramatically
[Guest]: in these villages. Now
[Guest]: these are the things which will never get reported by media
[Guest]: because you never know how it plays out.
[Guest]: Political misinformation,
[Guest]: you can see how it plays out, but
[Guest]: a bunch of kids not
[Guest]: taking vaccine and what happens
[Guest]: in their life cycle, you will never know.
[Guest]: You don't know who has taken
[Guest]: a vaccine, who has not taken a vaccine, why that
[Guest]: person did not take a vaccine.
[Guest]: When the dengue
[Guest]: season happens, there's
[Guest]: always this thing that if you have
[Guest]: papaya products, it will help
[Guest]: in increasing your platelet
[Guest]: level. Sumaya wrote an article
[Guest]: saying that
[Guest]: there's no conclusive research
[Guest]: to say that that happens.
[Guest]: But somebody who falls for that, they may
[Guest]: ignore what is
[Guest]: the prescribed medication.
[Guest]: And right now,
[Guest]: I would also again blame the government of India
[Guest]: for a lot of pseudo-information they have
[Guest]: created, that's this entire ministry called
[Guest]: Ayush. And there's
[Guest]: so much pseudo-information, pseudo-medical
[Guest]: information that goes out of it that they are
[Guest]: creating a culture of anti-science.
[Guest]: They are creating a culture of the
[Guest]: pseudo-science and that is
[Guest]: extremely dangerous.
[Guest]: And people, again,
[Guest]: in political misinformation,
[Guest]: there's a pattern that, as I was talking about, you are
[Guest]: weaving a fiction and
[Guest]: it follows a pattern. In medical
[Guest]: misinformation, there is no pattern.
[Guest]: Once in your head, you think that
[Guest]: papaya cures dengue,
[Guest]: you create a video about it, you
[Guest]: talk about it, so it disperses
[Guest]: without a pattern. And it is
[Guest]: extremely difficult to track misinformation.
[Guest]: A very important aspect
[Guest]: of fighting misinformation
[Guest]: is the ability to track misinformation.
[Guest]: And medical misinformation is
[Amit Varma]: very, very difficult to track.
[Amit Varma]: One point you made that I'd like to amplify is
[Amit Varma]: that this carries an opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I rail against homeopathy, which is
[Amit Varma]: a complete pseudo-sciences nonsense,
[Amit Varma]: the problem isn't only that the medicine
[Amit Varma]: will not work because people assume that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, sugar pills, what harm can it do?
[Amit Varma]: The problem also is that you could be relying
[Amit Varma]: on that instead of something that will
[Amit Varma]: actually cure you. And the cost of that
[Amit Varma]: could even be, and has been, in some cases,
[Guest]: death. Right. And
[Guest]: people say that there are no side
[Guest]: effects. Yes, of course, you're going to take sugar, what is
[Guest]: the point?
[Guest]: Unless you have diabetes or something
[Guest]: like that. But these are the kind
[Guest]: of theories that are propagated that, you know,
[Guest]: take it. It has no
[Guest]: side effects. And that is a virtue
[Guest]: that it is propagated that it has no
[Guest]: side effects. But the
[Guest]: fact is that, you know, it is not
[Amit Varma]: going to cure anything. I mean, just
[Amit Varma]: essentially, so how do you sort of fight
[Amit Varma]: medical misinformation like this? Like,
[Amit Varma]: is it a different kind of battle at Alt News?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, when somebody spreads a picture
[Amit Varma]: and says a picture of, you know, a rat,
[Amit Varma]: for example, in Muzaffarabad, and you
[Amit Varma]: have your tools to do your reverse image
[Amit Varma]: searches and you figure out where the image is really from
[Amit Varma]: and you can correct it immediately.
[Amit Varma]: But medical, and I guess you guys
[Amit Varma]: are very trained eyes and kind of now
[Amit Varma]: being immediately able to spot what is
[Amit Varma]: but for medical,
[Guest]: it must be much harder, surely. It is
[Guest]: much, much harder. And the main
[Guest]: issue is tracking medical misinformation.
[Guest]: There's so many videos on YouTube.
[Guest]: It is impossible to go and listen to every video
[Guest]: saying what they are talking about.
[Guest]: But there is a lot of medical
[Guest]: misinformation out there and people are going
[Guest]: to YouTube listening to these videos,
[Guest]: ghar ke nuske, whatever, you know.
[Guest]: And, you know, if you have this, this is going to happen.
[Guest]: And at this point of time,
[Guest]: we, you know,
[Guest]: I think we've had
[Guest]: much more strategy in terms of
[Guest]: rebelling,
[Guest]: not the word rebel, but sort of going
[Guest]: against political misinformation, but
[Guest]: medical misinformation, it is still
[Guest]: we are trying to figure out what to do.
[Guest]: And this especially
[Guest]: needs a wider support. Even
[Guest]: media organizations are so terrible at reporting.
[Guest]: Just the other day,
[Guest]: somebody said that Tata Salt has
[Guest]: cyanide. One gentleman
[Guest]: at a press conference said that Tata Salt
[Guest]: has cyanide. Everybody printed it.
[Guest]: Everybody without any fact checking.
[Guest]: Some university in Jamnagar
[Guest]: killed a few cells using
[Guest]: cow urine. Times of India has an article
[Guest]: next day, cow urine can
[Guest]: solve the issue of cancer. So that is
[Guest]: terrible, terrible journalism. And
[Guest]: we have seen real life impact of it.
[Guest]: A personal example, there was a person
[Guest]: who was working with us
[Guest]: in the unions and
[Guest]: his son got lung cancer.
[Guest]: At the same time, my father got lung cancer.
[Guest]: But it was a less aggressive strain of lung cancer.
[Guest]: When he eventually died
[Guest]: and when he went for his
[Guest]: final rites, we were told
[Guest]: that the last two weeks of his
[Guest]: life, he was fed only cow urine.
[Guest]: And they
[Guest]: starved the person to death.
[Guest]: And that person was anyway going to
[Guest]: die. And you made his last two weeks
[Guest]: the most terrible one can imagine.
[Guest]: But none of this will
[Guest]: get reported. Political misinformation
[Guest]: has real ramifications.
[Guest]: It is
[Guest]: something that you can observe, but
[Guest]: medical misinformation has ramifications
[Guest]: in this form. Having in houses
[Guest]: across the... and they don't even
[Guest]: know that they have been fed misinformation.
[Guest]: So it will never get reported. So medical
[Guest]: misinformation is something we don't recognize.
[Guest]: And the pseudoscience that we are putting
[Guest]: out more and more, and there is so much support
[Guest]: for pseudoscience now, that it
[Amit Varma]: is very dangerous. And the pseudoscience
[Amit Varma]: and these dangerous ways of beliefs are
[Amit Varma]: actually embedded in our culture. It's not
[Amit Varma]: as if you need a misinformation campaign
[Amit Varma]: to get it out. It's more a corrective
[Amit Varma]: that you need to take, which brings me to my next
[Amit Varma]: question about education. You know, you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out the importance
[Amit Varma]: of educating people on how to recognize
[Amit Varma]: misinformation, dealing with misinformation.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yes. So there are three parts. So one is
[Guest]: we started off as a journalistic intervention,
[Guest]: Alt News. We've now
[Guest]: come up with an app. It's a technological intervention.
[Guest]: But I think one of the most important
[Guest]: things is educational intervention,
[Guest]: where multiple things can be done.
[Guest]: So Alt News is planning. These are
[Guest]: things that we are planning, have not been executed.
[Guest]: But over the next five years, we
[Guest]: want to go to low-income communities, for example.
[Guest]: Now these are the communities where
[Guest]: we know that the Alt News brand is never going
[Guest]: to reach, especially because we can only
[Guest]: publish in two languages, English and Hindi.
[Guest]: And even Hindi is not going
[Guest]: that far. So what we realized
[Guest]: is that there's
[Guest]: a need to create quote-unquote
[Guest]: misinformation doctors or
[Guest]: Facebook fake news doctors in
[Guest]: these low-income communities where you
[Guest]: create influencers.
[Guest]: The way a lot of these rural
[Guest]: areas work is that there are social
[Guest]: influencers who have a huge
[Guest]: impact on the society.
[Guest]: So what we want to be able to do
[Guest]: is go and identify
[Guest]: certain individuals in various
[Guest]: communities and teach them how
[Guest]: to spot misinformation and
[Guest]: create a network for them. They may not be able to
[Guest]: sort of have
[Guest]: access to 100% of misinformation,
[Guest]: but through the app that we are creating, we
[Guest]: want to create a network for them so that
[Guest]: they can query us and sort of say that
[Guest]: this is the misinformation that is being
[Guest]: circulated in an area. What could be
[Guest]: the truth about this and things
[Guest]: like that? So we want
[Guest]: people to be able to go to this
[Guest]: local influencer and ask, is this
[Guest]: true or not? This is from
[Guest]: the point of view of these child kidnapping rumors, etc.
[Guest]: If there are enough influencers
[Guest]: in a small area where a person
[Guest]: can go and ask or when there's a mob
[Guest]: going on and somebody can say that, no, look,
[Guest]: this is wrong, then I think it will have
[Guest]: an impact in terms of local communities.
[Guest]: Second thing that we want to do
[Guest]: is start, create curriculum
[Guest]: at school level, especially high school.
[Guest]: This is the time when your prejudices
[Guest]: haven't completely set in.
[Guest]: And this is the time when a corrective measure will
[Guest]: most especially work, whether it is
[Guest]: against misinformation in science
[Guest]: and health or misinformation in politics
[Guest]: and especially science and health.
[Guest]: So that is where you teach
[Guest]: these students and these are also students
[Guest]: again, you know, who will have to
[Guest]: go to Google and figure out which university
[Guest]: they want to join. There will be 10,000 websites
[Guest]: which will say this university, this
[Guest]: is good, this is good. Now how does
[Guest]: a student handle this excess
[Guest]: of information? So we also are hoping
[Guest]: to deal with that to teach students
[Guest]: not only how to spot misinformation
[Guest]: but how to handle
[Guest]: excess of information. That is at
[Guest]: school level. And then
[Guest]: we want to concentrate on two things. One is
[Guest]: journalism schools where
[Guest]: again we are talking with certain universities where
[Guest]: we go and create a module, a two-week
[Guest]: module or a one-week module where we teach journalism
[Guest]: students how to
[Guest]: look at misinformation. The hope is
[Guest]: that you have more and more people looking at
[Guest]: misinformation. There is less and less of
[Guest]: misinformation, even though they may not
[Guest]: be at editor level, but I think if there is a larger
[Guest]: mass of journalists who are able to spot
[Guest]: misinformation, there will be a louder
[Guest]: voice against misinformation
[Guest]: in mainstream media, leading to
[Guest]: steady decline of misinformation.
[Guest]: Mainstream media also puts out misinformation.
[Guest]: That is also a thing that
[Guest]: needs to be done. And second thing is
[Guest]: we want to get in touch
[Guest]: with people who work on ground, social
[Guest]: workers, etc. And teach them how
[Guest]: to spot misinformation. And again,
[Guest]: create a network for all of these. Teach
[Guest]: academics because we did
[Guest]: some trainings in partnership
[Guest]: with Google and Data Leads.
[Guest]: We taught about 120-odd journalists.
[Guest]: And what we have observed is the academics
[Guest]: who have been the most active in
[Guest]: going out and furthering that,
[Guest]: taking those trainings and
[Guest]: training other people. So we want to
[Guest]: teach multiple academics, people who are
[Guest]: teaching in those journalism
[Guest]: colleges, because once you teach an academic,
[Guest]: that person can teach year after year. So it
[Guest]: has much more repetitive effect.
[Guest]: We don't know how far we'll be able to
[Guest]: go. This is a massive
[Guest]: task that we want to take up. We don't
[Guest]: have either the money or resources,
[Guest]: but these are things that
[Guest]: need to be done. And the hope
[Guest]: is that once you start at a small level
[Guest]: and you have more people getting into it,
[Guest]: then it
[Amit Varma]: increases organically.
[Amit Varma]: Has there so far been any interest for these courses
[Amit Varma]: from either journalistic organizations
[Amit Varma]: or institutions?
[Guest]: Yes, institutions.
[Guest]: We have spoken to multiple institutions
[Guest]: and they are willing to include
[Guest]: such a module, one-week
[Guest]: to two-week module, where students
[Guest]: are taught various tools of how to
[Guest]: spot misinformation
[Guest]: and things like that. Yes, there has been interest.
[Amit Varma]: That's pretty amazing. And I'd love to see an online
[Amit Varma]: MOOC on it as well, so that people can
[Amit Varma]: kind of learn online all the tricks of the trade.
[Guest]: There are, for example, there's a website
[Guest]: called firstdraft.com. They have an online
[Guest]: training. They have two trainings. One is
[Guest]: a short training and one is
[Guest]: a longer training, which is meant for
[Guest]: journalists. It's a free training. People just
[Guest]: have to sign up for it and
[Guest]: they can do that. Something
[Guest]: like that can be done at a large
[Guest]: level, definitely. But there are already
[Amit Varma]: resources out there. Let's talk about
[Amit Varma]: the AltNews app, which was
[Amit Varma]: just released, which I downloaded yesterday,
[Amit Varma]: played around a bit with it.
[Amit Varma]: What was the impetus behind it
[Amit Varma]: and what does it do?
[Guest]: So, we are trying to solve
[Guest]: a small section of the issue of misinformation.
[Guest]: The
[Guest]: observation that we made, that a large
[Guest]: majority of misinformation, especially
[Guest]: things that get circulated more viral,
[Guest]: is in form of images
[Guest]: and videos which are circulated with a certain
[Guest]: text blurb.
[Guest]: Usually, the misinformation is in the text blurb.
[Guest]: That is, you take a video image from somewhere
[Guest]: and you say that this represents an event
[Guest]: which it does not. So, we saw that
[Guest]: a large majority of misinformation
[Guest]: is this kind. Now,
[Guest]: the thing is that, again,
[Guest]: coming back to technology,
[Guest]: Google started, whatever, x number
[Guest]: of years ago. It is a wonderful search engine
[Guest]: for text. That is, you put in
[Guest]: a text, you put in a few keywords and
[Guest]: it throws back results.
[Guest]: But that was okay in
[Guest]: a world when the content
[Guest]: was text heavy. Now,
[Guest]: we are living in a world where the content
[Guest]: is image video heavy. There is so much
[Guest]: video content, image content
[Guest]: being created every single day.
[Guest]: And again, it brings back to the point of
[Guest]: Jio, etc., and cheap mobile phones, that
[Guest]: it enabled people to capture videos,
[Guest]: capture images, and put it out on
[Guest]: social media because of the cheap data connections.
[Guest]: And,
[Guest]: let's say about 20-25 years ago, because
[Guest]: camera equipment, all of that was so expensive
[Guest]: that most of the video and imagery
[Guest]: that was coming out, we knew who was putting out.
[Guest]: We know the photographer. We know all of that.
[Guest]: There's proper attribution. But now,
[Guest]: people just take videos anywhere
[Guest]: and you don't know where that has happened. There's no
[Guest]: sense of time or place.
[Guest]: So, there is a need
[Guest]: to document videos and images
[Guest]: at a large scale and create a
[Guest]: search engine against that. So, what this
[Guest]: app does is that we are trying to rethink
[Guest]: search engine in terms of misinformation.
[Guest]: We are not a Google where we can create
[Guest]: a worldwide image video search engine.
[Guest]: But what we are doing is we have created a search
[Guest]: engine of images and videos
[Guest]: against our database of fact checks
[Guest]: and we are also taking content from
[Guest]: other fact checkers. So,
[Guest]: you throw an image or video
[Guest]: at this app and if
[Guest]: you already fact checked it, it will search against
[Guest]: our database using various algorithms
[Guest]: to throw back the corresponding fact check.
[Guest]: And the hope is to do it at a
[Guest]: much larger database
[Guest]: where we are documenting
[Guest]: because there are so many videos
[Guest]: especially violent
[Guest]: videos that come out these days and
[Guest]: we have seen that eventually they become
[Guest]: a source of misinformation. So, start
[Guest]: documenting all these images and videos
[Guest]: even if there's no misinformation
[Guest]: corresponding to it, but start
[Guest]: documenting that because we ourselves will
[Guest]: forget there's so much video inventory.
[Guest]: I have only, you know,
[Guest]: these days we can look at a video
[Guest]: and say, okay, we saw it at this point in time, but
[Guest]: eventually it will be impossible to
[Guest]: do that just because there's so much
[Guest]: inventory. So, if we start documenting
[Guest]: it now, even though we
[Guest]: have debunked a video, let's say, two years ago,
[Guest]: I might forget two years down the line, but I can
[Guest]: throw a video at this app and it will
[Guest]: give me a result that, look, you wrote a fact check
[Guest]: for it two years ago. So, that is
[Guest]: what we are trying to do with this
[Guest]: app, that is create a video
[Guest]: slash image search engine
[Guest]: at a limited level against what
[Guest]: things that are typically
[Guest]: being used for misinformation
[Guest]: or have a
[Guest]: proclivity to be used for misinformation
[Amit Varma]: in the future.
[Amit Varma]: And does the app also serve as
[Amit Varma]: a means for people alerting you to
[Amit Varma]: stories you might not have already covered,
[Amit Varma]: but alerting you that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: here's this image that came on WhatsApp,
[Amit Varma]: is it kosher? And even if you haven't
[Amit Varma]: already done it, do you then get those
[Amit Varma]: images and decide if you should do a story on it?
[Guest]: So, there's a separate app that we will
[Guest]: create for it. We are calling it the
[Guest]: Misinfo Scanner. So, like the virus
[Guest]: scanner, where that
[Guest]: will be proactively looking at your gallery
[Guest]: and we won't be uploading images or videos,
[Guest]: but it will be like you have been exposed to
[Guest]: misinformation, that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: That is another idea that we are
[Guest]: working on, that, again, all this
[Guest]: database that we are collecting, there's
[Guest]: an API layer. Essentially, this
[Guest]: is a layer which answers to the question,
[Guest]: what is the fact check corresponding to this image or video?
[Guest]: Now, this layer can be connected to
[Guest]: various things, like a Twitter bot or Facebook
[Guest]: Messenger bot, but one of the applications
[Guest]: that we are thinking is a Misinfo Scanner.
[Guest]: You install this application and it will keep looking
[Guest]: at your gallery. It is not going to upload your images
[Guest]: and videos, so there's no issue of privacy
[Guest]: getting compromised. It is going to upload
[Guest]: only certain parameters of those images and videos,
[Guest]: and if we determine that you received
[Guest]: a video which
[Guest]: has been circulated with the element
[Guest]: of misinformation, we'll alert you.
[Guest]: So, I
[Guest]: am quite excited. Hopefully, that
[Guest]: app will come out in another six to eight months.
[Guest]: So, that will be sort of proactively
[Guest]: telling people that, look, there's misinformation.
[Guest]: So, when they go back to their WhatsApp
[Guest]: groups, they'll say, oh, I saw this.
[Guest]: Audience has already done an article. Let me push
[Guest]: an audience article, and then they can use
[Guest]: this other app to look for a fact check
[Guest]: corresponding to misinformation. So,
[Guest]: there are things that can be
[Guest]: done in technology to
[Guest]: sort of push back against misinformation.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, you know, you've been a
[Amit Varma]: pioneer on all this in building
[Amit Varma]: these systems, building AltNews.
[Amit Varma]: You've practically, you
[Amit Varma]: know, made it a mission to do all of this.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is that any big media
[Amit Varma]: company, if it had the will, could
[Amit Varma]: also have done all of this. And I think at some
[Amit Varma]: level, you would be very glad if AltNews
[Amit Varma]: wasn't needed, if people were doing it
[Guest]: all over the place and it... Absolutely.
[Guest]: And, again, it
[Guest]: goes back to the not-for-profit. So, we created
[Guest]: a not-for-profit knowing that we cannot have
[Guest]: 100 employees. We can have 15 to
[Guest]: 20 employees max, because that is,
[Guest]: you know, crowdfunding cannot
[Guest]: fund a 100-employee company.
[Guest]: So, which means that we can
[Guest]: never imagine to have an impact
[Guest]: that mainstream media does.
[Guest]: So, who do we impact? We impact
[Guest]: the mainstream media. That is, we create
[Guest]: models which others can follow.
[Guest]: So, AltNews started as a fact-checking
[Guest]: thing. Now, Times of India is fact-checking, India Today
[Guest]: is fact-checking, ThenxJargon is fact-checking.
[Guest]: That is where I take, you know, I think
[Guest]: Timelive and AltNews can take some credit that
[Guest]: it is we who forced them into fact-checking.
[Guest]: You know, it is we who created the model
[Guest]: and forced them into fact-checking. Similarly,
[Guest]: in case of this app, I won't say
[Guest]: media companies, but I would say tech companies.
[Guest]: They could have given us an app, something
[Guest]: like this. It's a very simple thought.
[Guest]: It is not a complicated thought, right?
[Guest]: You know that there's more image and videos
[Guest]: and you need a search engine to figure out
[Amit Varma]: image and video. It's a very simple thought. I mean, you can build
[Amit Varma]: it into Google for that matter, the Google app itself.
[Guest]: Yeah. So,
[Guest]: now, so what we are trying to do is
[Guest]: create this and then create
[Guest]: all these applications at Twitterbot.
[Guest]: So, let's say you tag AltNews
[Guest]: where the Twitterbot is being developed right now.
[Guest]: So, let's say you tag AltNews on a video image.
[Guest]: If you have fact-checked it, it will give you an automated
[Guest]: answer, right? Now, create
[Guest]: all these things and then tell
[Guest]: the tech companies that, look, we have
[Guest]: done this. Why haven't you done this?
[Guest]: So, that is what we are trying to do. Again,
[Guest]: when it comes to the educational initiative,
[Guest]: create a module, create a model.
[Guest]: If you can successfully implement
[Guest]: it in one small section,
[Guest]: then, first of all, you know that
[Guest]: there is a success story there, that we could implement
[Guest]: it in this one small section, and
[Guest]: that ways of replicating it
[Guest]: otherwise. When a
[Guest]: neighboring district sees that, okay, this has implemented,
[Guest]: let me do that. And as it grows,
[Guest]: the hope is that the model gets replicated.
[Guest]: So, as a small
[Guest]: not-for-profit website, the
[Guest]: focus will always be on creating
[Guest]: models that can be replicated
[Guest]: because we can never imagine
[Guest]: having an impact with people who
[Guest]: have a lot of money. So, create models
[Guest]: and hope that others sort of take those
[Guest]: models and go further.
[Amit Varma]: Prateek, now I'll segue into
[Amit Varma]: you know, as we approach the end of the episode,
[Amit Varma]: I'll segue into the personal and just
[Amit Varma]: ask you, Ratman, you know, you live in
[Amit Varma]: Ahmedabad, for God's sake.
[Amit Varma]: There have been threats against you.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, to me, you're one of the
[Amit Varma]: bravest people in the internet space
[Amit Varma]: in India. How do you deal with it?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, do you feel scared sometimes? Do you feel
[Amit Varma]: worried? Does it impact your social
[Amit Varma]: life or the way you live?
[Guest]: Number one,
[Guest]: first of all, you know,
[Guest]: we are publishing, writing, talking in English.
[Guest]: We are talking to a largely
[Guest]: urban, middle-class crowd.
[Guest]: That is a privilege in itself. We have seen
[Guest]: so many people getting
[Guest]: killed in India, in
[Guest]: rural areas. You know, somebody covering
[Guest]: a mining story, that person is
[Guest]: a truck runs over that person. We've forgotten.
[Guest]: I don't remember the name of the reporter,
[Guest]: right? Because that person was
[Guest]: never there in the urban
[Guest]: scape. So this privilege itself
[Guest]: gives you a sense of immunity that
[Guest]: if tomorrow something happens to me,
[Guest]: probably there are journalists who have done
[Guest]: much more work, but if
[Guest]: something happens to them, they will
[Guest]: be forgotten. But because I have
[Guest]: these 150,000 followers on Twitter
[Guest]: that I'm tweeting
[Guest]: every day and people know me by name and
[Guest]: some people know me by face, so that
[Guest]: is a privilege in itself. So that is one
[Guest]: thing. So I think
[Guest]: threats against
[Guest]: journalists in urban areas as opposed
[Guest]: to rural areas, people play up the threats
[Guest]: against people in urban areas much
[Guest]: more. What people in rural areas, journalists,
[Guest]: string reporters, are at
[Guest]: much more danger of having
[Guest]: physical elimination. Second
[Guest]: thing is that when it comes
[Guest]: to a physical threat, it doesn't matter where you
[Guest]: are, whether in Ahmedabad, whether
[Guest]: in Bangalore. We saw what happened to Gauri
[Guest]: and we have seen that. So location
[Guest]: doesn't matter. The only thing
[Guest]: that matters at that point of
[Guest]: time is, again, something that
[Guest]: I have learned from my parents, and
[Guest]: my mother is the director of the company
[Guest]: and she is the rock behind the company who
[Guest]: makes sure that we don't falter.
[Guest]: And that is finances. That is having
[Guest]: everything spick and span when it comes
[Guest]: to finance. So for example, we have donations,
[Guest]: we don't take a single rupee of cash donation.
[Guest]: The bank has given
[Guest]: ratified, made
[Guest]: sure that only the right kind of people
[Guest]: make bank accounts. We ask them to
[Guest]: donate. It's online donation.
[Guest]: It comes to a bank. There's no cash
[Guest]: transaction whatsoever. So
[Guest]: that is what we're doing. We're keeping everything
[Guest]: spick and span, paying our taxes, doing
[Guest]: everything. So
[Guest]: again, these are experiences
[Guest]: that are not necessarily mine.
[Guest]: These are experiences which my
[Guest]: parents have been sort of working against.
[Guest]: In 17, there was no BJP government
[Guest]: in Gujarat. It was Congress government.
[Guest]: BJP government came only in 95, and the
[Guest]: organization is working since 79.
[Guest]: They have the experience of working against various
[Guest]: establishments, and that
[Guest]: experience is an extremely
[Guest]: important experience which
[Guest]: can be sort of taken ahead for
[Guest]: different such causes.
[Amit Varma]: And to a lot of people listening
[Amit Varma]: to this episode, you're already a hero.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to embarrass you, but I'd call you one of the
[Amit Varma]: heroes of modern India. But I actually have
[Amit Varma]: a question for you, which is a
[Amit Varma]: functional question, which is that
[Amit Varma]: if people listening to this are convinced
[Amit Varma]: by this cause and they want to help you, they want to help
[Amit Varma]: AltNews, they want to
[Amit Varma]: help all the things that they're doing, how
[Guest]: can they do so? So various
[Guest]: ways. So for example, if you're
[Guest]: somebody who's a software programmer,
[Guest]: we need help in
[Guest]: developing more of these tools. We are going to open
[Guest]: source all of this. AltNews, again,
[Guest]: something that...
[Guest]: AltNews, all the things that we have written,
[Guest]: it's always under an open license. So
[Guest]: our content is under Creative Commons license. We
[Guest]: have never charged a single penny for our content.
[Guest]: We always say, take our content, do whatever you
[Guest]: want to do with the content.
[Guest]: So let's say if people want to translate that content,
[Guest]: take our content, translate it in your local
[Guest]: languages, put it out in our portals.
[Guest]: Just all we need is credit.
[Guest]: It was originally written by AltNews,
[Guest]: but start translating content
[Guest]: in your local languages.
[Guest]: If you're a techie, we need help in
[Guest]: terms of being able, getting
[Guest]: software help. It
[Guest]: becomes a challenge to organize people coming from
[Guest]: different people, and we have not figured out
[Guest]: a way...
[Guest]: We are actually getting a lot of help. A lot of
[Guest]: people email me saying that, I want to help you,
[Guest]: I want to help you. The problem is, how do you manage
[Guest]: all of these people in different places?
[Guest]: In Ahmedabad, all of us sit in a small
[Guest]: office and you can shout across,
[Guest]: but when people are in geographically
[Guest]: different areas, the managerial
[Guest]: overhead increases. So we have not
[Guest]: figured that out, but
[Guest]: there are various ways in...
[Guest]: If you're an academic,
[Guest]: we want to come out and
[Guest]: train you all.
[Guest]: If all academics can come together,
[Guest]: it's easier for us to train 30 academics
[Guest]: sitting in one room and telling them that this is
[Guest]: how you look at misinformation.
[Guest]: There are a variety of things that can be done,
[Guest]: and I don't think
[Guest]: all the ideas and solutions need to come from here.
[Guest]: People are very ingenious
[Guest]: when it comes to these things, and they will have
[Guest]: their own ideas of how to do things.
[Guest]: The thing is to
[Guest]: do things at small levels and
[Guest]: we can bring those efforts together
[Amit Varma]: under a platform.
[Amit Varma]: Prateek, thanks so much for being so generous with your time today.
[Amit Varma]: I learnt a lot talking to you. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode,
[Amit Varma]: do head on over to altnews.in
[Amit Varma]: and download the AltNews
[Amit Varma]: app and give it a test drive.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Prateek on Twitter at
[Amit Varma]: free underscore thinker. That's free underscore thinker.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of The Seen and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution, an independent
[Amit Varma]: centre for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses
[Amit Varma]: in public policy, technology policy
[Amit Varma]: and strategic studies for both
[Amit Varma]: full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more
[Amit Varma]: details. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: India's a massive subcontinent
[Unknown]: home to truly stunning
[Unknown]: diversity.
[Unknown]: Behind the veils of smoke
[Unknown]: that obscure our thriving cities,
[Unknown]: our history is still alive,
[Unknown]: glimmering like sequins
[Unknown]: waiting to be discovered.
[Unknown]: And if you, like me,
[Unknown]: are straining to hear the echoes
[Unknown]: of our past, this podcast
[Unknown]: is for you. I'm Anirudh
[Unknown]: Kanisetti, a history and
[Unknown]: geopolitics researcher and I host
[Unknown]: Echoes of India, a history
[Unknown]: podcast about India, by
[Unknown]: Indians and for Indians.
[Unknown]: In Echoes, we journey
[Unknown]: through the complex histories of
[Unknown]: South Asia and what they can teach us
[Unknown]: about our globalised world.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Wednesday on ivmpodcast.com
[Unknown]: or your favourite podcast
[Unknown]: app.
[Unknown]: And many more on our show
[Unknown]: paperback. Find new episodes every
[Unknown]: Wednesday on IVM Podcast app
[Unknown]: website or wherever you listen to podcasts.